Protein Cell 2015, 6(9):628–637
DOI 10.1007/s13238-015-0185-x

Protein & Cell

REVIEW
Functional metabolomics: from biomarker
discovery to metabolome reprogramming
Bo Peng2, Hui Li1, Xuan-Xian Peng1&

Protein & Cell

1

Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, MOE Key Lab Aquat
Food Safety, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China
2
Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
& Correspondence: pxuanx@sysu.edu.cn (X.-X. Peng)
Received May 7, 2015 Accepted May 28, 2015

ABSTRACT
Metabolomics is emerging as a powerful tool for studying
metabolic processes, identifying crucial biomarkers
responsible for metabolic characteristics and revealing
metabolic mechanisms, which construct the content of
discovery metabolomics. The crucial biomarkers can be
used to reprogram a metabolome, leading to an aimed
metabolic strategy to cope with alteration of internal and
external environments, naming reprogramming metabolomics here. The striking feature on the similarity of the
basic metabolic pathways and components among vastly
different species makes the reprogramming metabolomics
possible when the engineered metabolites play biological
roles in cellular activity as a substrate of enzymes and a
regulator to other molecules including proteins. The
reprogramming metabolomics approach can be used to
clarify metabolic mechanisms of responding to changed
internal and external environmental factors and to establish a framework to develop targeted tools for dealing with
the changes such as controlling and/or preventing infection with pathogens and enhancing host immunity against
pathogens. This review introduces the current state and
trends of discovery metabolomics and reprogramming
metabolomics and highlights the importance of reprogramming metabolomics.

KEYWORDS metabolomics, discovery metabolomics,
reprogramming metabolomics, metabolic strategy, metabolic
regulation

INTRODUCTION
Metabolism is the cornerstone of life, with the set of life-sustaining chemical transformations within the cells of living

organisms to provide building blocks and energy equivalents
for fundamental biological processes, such as cell growth, cell
differentiation and environmental adaptation. The chemical
transformations, one chemical being transformed into a new
chemical, are organized as metabolic cascades, which are
catalyzed by a series of enzymes. As the major players in
metabolic pathways, enzymes drive the desirable reactions
but also regulate metabolic pathways positively or negatively
to maintain the energy homeostasis within the cells. Regulation of metabolism entails several levels of controls including
transcriptional, posttranscriptional and allosteric mechanisms
to eventually affect enzyme abundance and kinetics (Fuhrer
and Zamboni, 2015), indicating metabolism is a complex and
dynamic process with systemic outcomes represented by
metabolites. The thorough and comprehensive analysis of the
metabolites, named as metabolomics, would provide the
insights of cellular activities without considering the change of
genetic or epigenetic changes.
Metabolomics has been extensively used in basic and
applied research in recent years and gradually become a
mutually complementary technique to genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics (Dumas, 2012; Castro-Santos et al.,
2015). Metabolomics speciﬁcally addresses the activity of
the small molecules(<10 kDa) produced by active and living
cells during their life cycles, which are not accessible by
genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics (Peng, 2013).
Therefore, metabolomics can give an instantaneous snapshot of the physiological status of the cells, which tells
people how the metabolic proﬁle of a complex biological
system is changed in response to stress like adverse factors,
environmental alterations or physiological adaption to dietary
change (Patel and Ahmed, 2015; Zhang et al., 2014; Gibbons et al., 2015). Metabolomics speeds up the understanding of global metabolic characteristics, elucidation of
metabolic mechanisms and identiﬁcation of metabolic

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

biomarkers. A striking feature of metabolism is the similarity
of the basic metabolic pathways and metabolites among
vastly different species, while genes, mRNAs and proteins
are diversiﬁed from species to species. In this regard,
metabolomics is a universal language to describe a complex
life activity across different species. For example, the set of
carboxylic acids that are best known as the intermediates in
the TCA cycle are present in all known organisms, being
found in species as diverse as from unicellular bacterium like
Escherichia coli to huge multicellular organisms like elephants and complex multicellular organisms like humans.
These similarities in metabolic pathways and metabolites are
likely due to their early appearance in evolution and their
retention because of their efﬁcacy. Compared to other
OMICs, metabolomics provides broad scope and yet direct
information on the integrated cellular response to changes in
internal and external environment with low demand in
material and sample preparation (Fuhrer and Zamboni,
2015). While the current state and trends of high throughput
metabolomics proﬁling focus on the purpose of discovering
biomarkers and hunting for metabolic mechanism, a
prospective direction, namely reprogramming metabolomics,
highlights the way to use metabolomics approach for the
purpose of prevention and treatment of disease through
reconstitution of perturbed metabolic pathways (Peng et al.,
2015a). Therefore, metabolomics is not only used to discover the metabolome of cells or organisms under different
conditions but also used to evaluate the reprogramming
efﬁcacy of exogenous metabolite treatment, which were
termed as discovery metabolomics and reprogramming
metabolomics, respectively. In this review, we summarize the
current state and trends of discovery metabolomics and
reprogramming metabolomics and highlight the importance
of reprogramming metabolomics for therapeutic purpose.

TECHNIQUES FOR DISCOVERY METABOLOMICS
Metabolomics is a universally applicable, comprehensive
analytical approach for the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of
metabolites in a biological system, leading to description and
understanding of a metabolic-responsive proﬁle (Holmes
et al., 2008; Suhre et al., 2011). The discovery metabolomics
has been established and applied as the method of choice
for investigating metabolic phenotypes in life science
research. Metabolomic studies consist of two sequential
procedures: (1) High throughput detection of an all-inclusive
spectrum of the complete proﬁle of low-molecular weight
metabolites in a biological sample; (2) Model recognizable
analysis for interpreting detected data.
To identify, quantify and characterize the small molecules/
metabolites in cell or organism, metabolomics primarily
depends on high throughput analytical technologies. The
most commonly used technologies in metabolomics are
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and mass
spectrometry (MS). The most popular analytical methods in

MS are gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS),
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and
capillary electrophoresis coupled to mass spectrometry (CEMS). These four analytical methods provide technical pillars
for high throughput discovery metabolomics. Each of these
techniques has its own advantages and disadvantages.
NMR provides an in situ way for monitoring certain classes
of metabolites with high reproducibility and less inter-laboratory variation. More importantly, NMR allows a rapid,
nondestructive and automated analysis of crude extracts,
and the quantitative detection of many different groups of
metabolites. But the drawback is the limitation of sensitivity
and dynamic range (Wolfender et al., 2015). GC-MS integrates the advantage of high resolution, separation reproducibility and the stable metabolite fragmentation patterns
from the standardized MS electron ionization energy of
70 eV and is ideally suited for the analysis of both volatile
and nonvolatile compounds (or compounds with volatile
derivatives) (Gao and Xu, 2015). GC-MS has long been
used for identifying metabolites of biological ﬂuids. However,
the variety of metabolites that can be analyzed with this
technique is limited by the volatility or the ability to form
appropriate volatile derivatives of the molecules. LC-MS
allows the analysis of thermally labile but non-volatile compounds. LC-MS detects the molecules that range from polar
sugars and non-aromatic organic acids to various lipids
(Commisso et al., 2013). Recently, CE-MS has emerged as
an attractive technique for the proﬁling of polar and charged
compounds in biological samples and used in metabolomics
due to complementation of unique chemical information that
is not provided by GC-MS and LC-MS (Ramautar et al.,
2015). The combination of GC-MS with NMR or/and LC-MS
has widely used in separation, dramatization and characterization of small molecules/metabolites (Kumar et al, 2014;
Gao and Xu, 2015). This leads to the improvement of
structural analysis and better interpretation of targeted
metabolome.
Most of the metabolomics data is recorded as unassigned
peaks of different intensity on different retention times,
masses or mass fragments (mass spectrometric data) or
chemical shifts (NMR data). Analysis and interpretation of
these data show more common features among different
MS-based platforms. The area of each compound peak is
extracted from the total ion chromatograms with software.
Single ions are used to deconvolute overlapping peaks.
Compounds are identiﬁed based on matching with retention
time and mass spectrum. The data matrix must be normalized before statistical analysis. The normalization factors are
dependent on different requirements. The internal standards
or statistical models derived from the complete dataset, e.g.,
the total peak intensities, the quartile range or the corresponding metabolite fragments are generally used in the
relevant quality control samples (Gao and Xu, 2015). After
normalization, multivariate statistical methods or pattern
recognition methods are used to handle the acquired data, to

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

629

Protein & Cell

REVIEW

Reprogramming metabolomics

REVIEW

Bo Peng et al.

search for the discriminating features and to identify the
biomarkers from the tested samples.

Protein & Cell

DISCOVERY METABOLOMICS
The metabolome can be a very sensitive measure of an
organism’s phenotype because metabolites are the ﬁnal
products of enormous genome-wide or proteome-wide
interactions. This fact has made metabolomics particularly
useful in the study of environment-gene and -protein interactions (Rojo et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2015; Zhang et al.,
2015), the identiﬁcation of disease biomarkers (Peng et al.,
2015b), revelation of pathogenesis (Kim et al., 2015; Ghartey et al., 2015) and the discovery of novel drugs (Mastrangelo et al., 2014; Krug and Müller, 2014). Metabolism is
also embedded in the sensing and signaling machinery,
integrating information transmitted from internal and external
environment of cells (Helms et al, 2015; Zheng et al., 2015).
Therefore, metabolism is pivotal in decision-making in both
health and disease and a valuable target for targeted therapy. Current metabolomics studies essentially focus on what
can be known from the metabolome. The discovery metabolomics studies aim to measure the up-regulation and
down-regulation of metabolites in abundance, and the
impact of their variations on metabolic pathways and networks. Typically, the discovery metabolomics is addressed to
identify biomarkers to improve early diagnosis, accurate
prognosis and aid adequate monitoring of disease and
understand physiological changes in response to environmental alteration (Gibbons et al, 2015).
Recently, the metabolomics approach has been widely
used in investigation of cellular activity. In biomedical application, this approach is usually employed to identify altered
abundance of metabolites and the affected metabolic pathways in a disease-speciﬁc manner for use as diagnostic
markers or therapeutic targets (Budczies et al., 2015). Budczies et al., used GC-MS based metabolomics to quantify the
dysregulation of the glutamate-glutamine equilibrium and
characterize glutamate accumulation as new diagnostic
opportunity in breast cancer. These ﬁndings may have
important implications for patient stratiﬁcation related to utilization of glutaminase inhibitors (Budczies et al., 2015).
Metabolomics is also performed to characterize the interactions of organisms with their environment for the discovery of
new disease risk biomarkers and diagnostics. Changes in the
metabolic proﬁles in a group of 389 healthy smelter workers
exposed to lead, cadmium and arsenic were studied on pooled
serum samples using proton nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. These multivariate metabolomics datasets
were analyzed with principal component analysis and partial
least squares discriminant analysis. Analysis of metabolic
proﬁles of people exposed to heavy metals suggested that
energy metabolism disturbance could be induced by heavy
metals (Dudka et al., 2014). Changes in lipid fraction, unsaturated lipids and in the level of amino acids suggested the
perturbation of lipids metabolism and amino acids
630

metabolism. This approach is capable of identifying intermediate biomarkers of response to toxicants at environmental/
occupational concentrations, paving the way to its use in a
monitoring of smelter workers exposed to low doses of lead,
cadmium and arsenic (Dudka et al., 2014). Do et al., presented
a generic, data-driven network-based approach for structuring
and visualizing metabolite correlations within and between
multiple body ﬂuids including blood, urine and saliva, enabling
unbiased interpretation of metabolomics multiﬂuid data (Do
et al., 2015).
In preclinical and clinical drug development, the applications of metabolomics have a considerable scope in the
pharmaceutical industry, almost at each step from drug discovery to clinical development. These include determination
of drug target, potential safety and efﬁcacy biomarkers and
mechanisms of drug action, the validation of preclinical
experimental models against human disease proﬁles, and
the discovery of clinical safety and efﬁcacy biomarkers
(Kumar et al., 2014). Farag et al., indicated comparative
metabolomics could be utilized for Senna drug quality control
analysis. They revealed secondary metabolite compositional
differences among Senna species through utilizing both
UPLC-MS and NMR and recognition methods (Farag et al.,
2015). Weckmann et al., showed that a single injection of
Ketamine had an impact on the major energy metabolism
pathways and indicated that 2-ketoisovalerate, glutathione,
maleate, methylmalonate, fumarate and cytosine qualify as
biomarkers for the Ketamine drug response (Weckmann
et al., 2014). Since treatment of mammalian cells with
chemotherapeutic drugs can result in perturbations of
nucleotide pools, Liu et al., monitored these perturbations in
cultured human tumor cells for a better understanding of the
mechanism of action of these drugs. They showed that GMP
and ATP were the best potential biomarkers for DNA-damaging drugs, as well as GMP, ATP and UDP for the
antimetabolite and the mitotic spindle agents. These results
provide a preliminary evidence for the role of pharmacometabolomics in the preclinical development of drugs (Liu
et al., 2014).
Applications of discovery metabolomics in nutritional
research can include three main areas: identiﬁcation of dietary
biomarkers, study of diet-related diseases and identiﬁcation of
biomarkers of disease and application to dietary intervention
studies as a tool to identify molecular mechanisms (Gibbons
et al., 2015). Metabolomics is impactful on all of these areas
and contributes signiﬁcantly on the study of diet-health relationships (Gibbons et al., 2015; Brennan, 2014). Wagner et al.,
showed that the nutritional state of a freshwater invertebrate,
Daphnia magna, could be determined by analyzing endogenous metabolites using hydrogen nuclear magnetic resonance-based metabolomics. In addition, the metabolite
composition of D. magna was correlated to the diets they were
taking and environmental stresses they suffered. Thus, dietary-speciﬁc induced changes in metabolite composition of
animal consumers hold considerable promise as indicators of
nutritional stress and will be invaluable for future studies of

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

animal nutrition (Wagner et al., 2015). The Mediterranean diet
is a dietary pattern with beneﬁcial effects on human health.
Vazquez-Fresno et al., used NMR-based metabolomics to
assess the effect of an Mediterranean diet on urinary metabolome and revealed that the most prominent hallmarks
concerning Mediterranean diet groups were related to the
metabolism of carbohydrates, creatine, creatinine, amino
acids, lipids and microbial cometabolites. The application of
NMR-based metabolomics enables the classiﬁcation of individuals regarding their dietary pattern and highlights the
potential of this approach for evaluating changes in the urinary
metabolome at different time points of follow-up in response to
speciﬁc dietary interventions (Vázquez-Fresno et al. 2014).
Floegel et al., investigated the associations between diet,
physical activity, cardiorespiratory ﬁtness and obesity with
serum metabolite networks in a population-based study and
found that amino acids were particularly positively associated
with cardiorespiratory ﬁtness and physical activity. C6-sugar
and acylcarnitines were positively associated with obesity and
inversely associated to the intake of whole-grain bread.
Phospholipids were negatively associated with obesity and
coffee intake. Metabolic networks of coffee intake and obesity
were inversely correlated. Strong positive correlation was
observed between metabolite networks of body mass index
and waist circumference, as well as the metabolic networks of
cake and cookie intake with cardiorespiratory ﬁtness and
intake of whole-grain bread. Therefore, lifestyle factors and
phenotypes seem to interrelate in various metabolic pathways
(Floegel et al., 2014).
Development of stress-tolerant plants and reducing the
gap between the pace of natural products research and
highly-demanded modern drug discovery are emerging
topics in current plant industry. The applications of discovery
metabolomics greatly beneﬁt the elucidation of molecular
mechanisms involved in biotic or abiotic stress, phytomedicines quality control analysis and drug discovery from
natural sources (Nakabayashi and Saito, 2015; Jorge et al.,
2015; Mahrous and Farag et al., 2015). Salt stress is an
important factor that limits crop production worldwide.
Kusuda et al., compared the metabolic proﬁles between
myo-inositol 3-phosphate synthase-overexpressing and
wild-type rice and found myo-inositol 3-phosphate synthase
improved salt stress tolerance through activation of central
metabolism, such as glycolysis, the pentose phosphate
pathway, the TCA cycle and inositol metabolism (Kusuda
et al., 2015). Sun et al., used NMR techniques to examine
the metabolic responses of maize plants grown under different conditions including soil drought, soil salinity, heat and
multiple concurrent stresses. Drought-stressed maize plants
subjected to salt or heat stress showed distinct integrated
metabolic proﬁles compared with those exposed to either
stress alone. Moreover, the TCA cycle and core nitrogen
metabolism were identiﬁed, which were related to their
multiple functions during plant growth. The primary metabolic
responses to soil drought, heat and combined drought and
heat stress occurred in a time-dependent manner, indicating

that plasticity at the metabolic level might allow maize plants
to accumulate their metabolic ranges in response to environmental change (Sun et al., 2015).
In microbiological research and industrial fermentation
applications, the discovery metabolmics is used in metabolic
ﬂux analysis, gene function elucidation, enzyme function
analysis and fermentation optimization (Gao and Xu, 2015).
NtcA, a conserved cAMP receptor protein-type transcription
factor among cyanobacteria, regulates gene expression in
response to nitrogen status. Osanai et al., overexpressed
ntcA in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, which dramatically
affected sugar, purine/pyrimidine nucleotide, organic acid
and amino acid metabolisms. This study set an example to
advance the understanding of metabolic regulation of unicellular cyanobacteria (Osanai et al., 2014). Dörries et al.,
investigated the impact of antibiotic compounds with different
cellular targets on the metabolome of Staphylococcus aureus HG001. They found far-ranging effects within the
metabolome by comparing the metabolic proﬁles of
unstressed and stressed staphylococcal cells in a time-dependent manner. They showed that ciproﬂoxacin altered the
pool of deoxy- nucleotides and peptidoglycan precursors;
erythromycin tended to increase the amounts of intermediates of the pentose phosphate pathway and lysine; fosfomycin inhibited the ﬁrst enzymatic step of peptidoglycan
synthesis; vancomycin and ampicillin inhibited the last stage
of peptidoglycan construction on the outer cell surface. Each
antibiotic also affected intracellular levels of the TCA intermediates (Dörries et al., 2014). These results suggested an
association of antibiotic action with metabolic environment.
Wu et al., used GC-MS approach to disclose the metabolic
mechanism manipulated by glycine, which led to higher
antifungal activity, in a fungal strain Penicillium citrinum W1
isolated from a Southwest Indian Ocean sediment sample.
They showed that elevated glycine, serine and threonine
metabolism promoted biosynthesis of fatty acids and the
TCA cycle and thereby contributed to bacterial growth and
antifungal activity. Further the replacement of glycine with
serine demonstrated the reliability of the identiﬁed glycine,
serine and threonine metabolism. These results indicate
functional metabolimcs is a powerful tool for understanding
mechanisms through supplementing compound (Wu et al.,
2015).
Recently, the metabolite-based genome-wide association
study (mGWAS) has allowed the simultaneous analysis of
the genetic and environmental impacts on homeostasis
(Adamski, 2012). It has emerged as a powerful alternative
forward genetics strategy to dissect the genetic and biochemical basis of metabolism, providing a useful approach
for functional gene identiﬁcation with more precision, standardization, robustness and sensitivity (Adamski and Suhre,
2013). Feng et al., performed an mGWAS on stools from
advanced adenoma and carcinoma patients and from healthy subjects, revealing microbial genes, strains and functions
enriched in each group and suggested that fecal microbiome-based strategies might be useful for early diagnosis

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

631

Protein & Cell

REVIEW

Reprogramming metabolomics

REVIEW

Bo Peng et al.

and treatment of colorectal adenoma or carcinoma (Feng
et al., 2015). The developed mGWAS described the proﬁle
that metabolites and small molecules were not independent.
They were organized in biochemical pathways and in a wider
metabolic network, which was self-dependent on various
genetic and signaling networks for its regulation (Dumas,
2012). Importantly, a new generation of integrative study of
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics
improves an understanding of the response mechanism of
organisms to internal and external environments (Dumas
et al., 2014; Bielecka et al., 2014; Klähn et al., 2015).

Protein & Cell

REPROGRAMMING METABOLOMICS
Metabolomics is a powerful tool for exploring the alterations
in the metabolite abundance, and metabolic pathways and
networks which are involved in various pathophysiological
conditions and offers the platform for identiﬁcation of genotype-phenotype as well as genotype-envirotype interactions
(Kumar et al., 2014). On the other hand, the similarity of the
basic metabolic pathways and components between different species as well as the commercially available metabolite
lead to a possibility that metabolome can be reprogrammed
by exogenous metabolites (Peng et al., 2015a), which is very
difﬁcult to be achieved by conventional genetic means.
Metabolome is the collection of end products of cellular
activities, reﬂecting the status of cells at certain stage. Cells
resistant to certain factor can be sensitized to the factor by
administrating certain metabolite. Therefore, metabolomic
approach is used not only to screen biomarkers of diseases,
but also to identify crucial metabolites or potential drugs to
revert or enhance the status according to requirement. This
is because the metabolites have biological activities (Matsuda et al., 2014; Carey et al., 2015). The binding of various
types of metabolites with hormones, fatty acids, drugs or
other xenobiotics, transport proteins and receptors proteins
has been reported (Matsuda et al., 2014; Tannahill et al.,
2013). The binding of metabolites to proteins leading to
conformational and functional change of the protein is of
growing interest recently (Matsuda et al., 2014). Thus,
metabolomics change is a strategy that host mounts to cope
with changes of the internal and external environment.
Exogenous crucial metabolites can reprogram the metabolic
strategy to adapt or suppress such changes.
Metabolites play biological roles in cell activity as a substrate of enzymes and a regulator to other molecules
including proteins and nucleic acids. Metabolite abundance
is decisive to the biological roles. When the abundance is
changed, activity of the enzymes and action of the regulated
molecules will be modulated, which affect the metabolic
pathways and networks and possibly modulate the metabolic
ﬂow. Differential activation or suppression of one or more
metabolic pathways could be a critical feature of the
response (stress or disease) phenotype. If a responsive
‘metabolome’ could be identiﬁed, it may be possible to
632

induce susceptibility or resistance to response-induced
treatment by exogenous administration of a crucial
metabolite that is less or more abundant in the response
metabolome. In other words, the response-resistant or
-susceptible metabolome could be converted into the
response-susceptible or resistant metabolome by engineering the metabolic environment, respectively. This leads to
metabolome reprogramming. The reprogramming metabolomics approach can be used to clarify the mechanism of cell
response and then based on the mechanism to establish a
framework to develop convenient and efﬁcient tools for
dealing with the changes such as controlling and/or preventing infection with pathogens and enhancing host
immunity against pathogens.
Bacterial antibiotic resistance is a threat to human health
and to the viability of animal and plant species in the human
food chain (Li et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2014). However, novel
drugs that can manage infections by multidrug-resistant
bacteria have proved elusive. We demonstrated that the
bacterial susceptibility to antibiotics was strongly associated
with metabolic states, and that speciﬁc metabolic proﬁles
were correlating with certain antibiotic-resistance. Glucose,
fructose and alanine abundances are greatly suppressed in
kanamycin-resistant Edwardsiella tarda revealed by GC/MS
based metabolomics. Exogenous alanine, glucose or fructose restores susceptibility of multidrug-resistant E. tarda to
killing by kanamycin. Similar results were obtained with other
Gram-negative bacteria including Vibrio parahaemolyticus,
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Gram-positive bacterium Staphylococcus aureus. These
results were also reproduced in a mouse model for urinary
tract infection. Therefore, metabolites that reverted the
metabolomics proﬁle of an antibiotic-resistant strain to that of
an antibiotic-sensitive strain could potentially revert the
antibiotic resistance (Fig. 1) (Peng et al., 2015a; Su et al.,
2015). The study proposes a novel approach to identify
metabolic modulator through investigation of metabolomics,
by which crucial modulators can be used for therapeutic
purpose through reprogramming metabolome (Bhargava
and Collins, 2015).
Elimination of microbes through regulation of immunity
has been widely accepted. This leads to widespread use of
immune modulators to control infections. Interferon (IFN)
family is a large group of cytokines involved in innate
immune response against various microorganisms. However, whether IFN functions in antimicrobial property by
metabolic pathways is largely unknown. When GC/MSbased metabolomics was applied to humoral ﬂuid of zebraﬁsh (Dario rerio) exposed to three different doses of IFN-α2b,
designed as IFN-L (low dose), IFN-M (middle dose) and IFNH (high dose), forty-three IFN-responsive metabolites were
identiﬁed. Analysis on the dose-related metabolites indicated
that biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids was enriched
only in IFN-M and IFN-H, which was related to IFN-α2b high
protection against bacterial infection. Moreover, exogenous
fatty acids, especially unsaturated linoleic acid, elevated

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

REVIEW

Reprogramming metabolomics

Drug-sensitive

Drug-resistant

Metabolome

Metabolome

Biomarkers

Reprogramming metabolites

Supplements

Reprogramming

Alanine Glucose Fructose

NDH

H

+
H+ H

+

Q

Cytoplasm
Alanine Glucose Fructose

NADH H+ NAD+

oA
-C
yl
Ac

et

CS

Oxaloacetate

TCA
cycle

Fumarate
SDH

Quniol
oxidase
H+

lsocitrate
ICDH

Citrate

Pyruvate

Kanamycin

PMF

Protein & Cell

Extracellular
space

H+

Cell death

α-Ketoglutarate
OGD
Succinyl-CoA

Succinate

SucC

Figure 1. Antibiotic-resistant metabolome is reprogrammed to antibiotic-susceptible metabolome by exogenous alanine,
fructose and glucose. These exogenous metabolites promote TCA ﬂux, increase proton-motive force and lead to kanamycin
uptake.

survival ability of zebraﬁsh infected with extracellular
pathogenic V. alginolyticus and intracellular pathogenic
Edwardsiella tarda. Since the dose of IFN-α2b was proportional to protective ability against bacteria and exogenous
fatty acids played the similar roles in eliminating microbial
infection, activation of biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids
became a downstream pathway to mediate anti-microbial
function of IFN-α2b. These results reveal an unknown
mechanism by which IFN-α2b protects host from microbial
infections, highlighting the ways to understand action of IFN
in content of metabolic regulation (Zhao et al., 2014).
Besides the reprogramming metabolome of immune
regulator such as IFN-α2b, the approach can be used to
restore host defense ability from susceptibility to resistance
to pathogens. Streptococcosis causes massive tilapia kills,
which results in heavy economic losses of tilapia farming
industry. Current antibiotic options are limited and possess
severe practical limitations and potential adverse environmental impacts. GC-MS based metabolomics is used to
characterize variation of metabolomes in response to
S. iniae. Nine key metabolites that separate the survivals

from the dying and control were identiﬁed. N-acetylglucosamine was the most critical metabolite elevated in survival groups but decreased in dying groups. The reversal
change formed a characteristic feature as a result of tilapias
against infection caused by S. iniae. When exogenous
N-acetylglucosamine was added, the survival ability signiﬁcantly elevated by at least 35%. In anti-S. agalactiae metabolome, signiﬁcant decrease of several amino acids and
their metabolic pathways was characterized. L-proline was
identiﬁed as a crucial biomarker. Three-day L-proline-supplemented tilapias by intraperitoneal injection or oral
administration before challenging with S. agalactiae showed
the signiﬁcant higher resistance against the challenging
bacteria, elevating 60% survival rates in group with 2 mg
L-proline injection (Cheng et al., 2014). In the same way, the
approach can be used to reprogram a metabolic strategy to
modulate the effect of temperature on bacterial toxicity. S.
agalactiae killed more tilapias in higher than lower temperatures, where 50% mortality and 70% mortality were reported for tilapias cultured in 25°C and 30°C, respectively while
no death was detected at 20°C (Zhao et al., 2015). We

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

633

REVIEW

Bo Peng et al.

investigated the metabolome change in the livers of tilapia.
Thirty-six and forty-ﬁve varied abundance of metabolites
were identiﬁed in livers of tilapias cultured at 25°C and 30°C,
respectively. Decreasing abundance of L-proline was identiﬁed as a crucial biomarker for indexing higher water temperature and a potential modulator to reduce the high death.
This was validated by engineering injection or oral addition of
L-proline. Exogenous L-proline led to elevated amino acid
metabolism, which contributed to the elevated survivals
(Zhao et al., 2015). These results highlight the way to identify
drug potentials to combat microbial infections though
reprogramming metabolome (Fig. 2).

Protein & Cell

METHODOLOGIES FOR REPROGRAMMING
METABOLOMICS
Reprogramming metabolomics identiﬁes crucial biomarkers
and pathways while discovery metabolomics does to provide
potential metabolic modulators, reprogramming metabolites,
for modulating an existing metabolome to a targeted metabolome. This leads to reconstitution of metabolic strategy. The
reconstitution can be demonstrated by metabolomics analysis
and functional assays (Peng et al., 2015a). The metabolomics
analysis is used to validate the effect of exogenous metabolite
boosting on varied metabolites and pathways and identify the
metabolic ﬂux magnitudes into each metabolite pool by
determining the mass isotopomer distribution for all labeled
compounds (Peng et al., 2015a). The functional assays provide proofs on whether the reconstituted metabolic strategy
may show the similar phenotypes and the mechanism of
action (Peng et al., 2015a; Su et al., 2015; Cheng et al., 2014;
Zhao et al., 2014; Ma et al., 2015). Thus, reprogramming
metabolomics reveal the response and reconstituted

Samples

NMR GC-MS LC-MS CE-MS

Integrated metabolomics technologies
Other OMICs technologies

Key enriched pathways

Crucial biomarkers

Crucial reprogramming metabolites
Engineering metabolites
Reprogramming phenotype

Reprogramming metabolome

Reprogramming mechanism

Reprogramming significance

Figure 3. Outline of reprogramming metabolome.

mechanisms by analysis of the response metabolome and
reconstituted metabolome, respectively, in which methods on
molecular biology and biochemistry, cell biology and
immunology will become basic tool to elucidate these mechanisms. The general methodologies of the reprogramming
metabolomics are outlined in Fig. 3.

Bacteria

SUMMARY AND PERSPECTIVES
Host
Death

Survival

Survival metabolome

Death metabolome

Biomarkers
Reprogramming

Figure 2. Bacterial infection-sensitive metabolome is reprogrammed to bacterial anti-infective metabolome by exogenous crucial metabolites. Sublethal dose of pathogen causes
hosts either to die or survival, which is related to their
metabolomes. Crucial metabolites can be identiﬁed by comparison of the two metabolomes. Exogenous addition of the crucial
metabolites increases the chances of survival.

634

While recent studies on metabolic proﬁles, metabolic
biomarkers and metabolic mechanisms by the discovery
metabolomics have substantially increased our understanding of cellular activity, it has also become clear that we should
pay more attention to the reprogramming metabolomics. The
striking feature on the similarity of the basic metabolic pathways and components between vastly different species
makes the reprogramming metabolomics possible, forming a
characteristic feature that differentiates from other OMICs.
The reprogramming metabolomics combines response
metabolome with reconstitution metabolome together to
clarify response and reconstitution mechanisms and provide
potential drugs for the purposes of disease prevention and
treatment. Future research towards the theory and application
of reprogramming metabolomics for the reconstitution of host
metabolic strategies or the modulating of pathogenic
microbes’ adverse metabolomes needs to be focused on
understanding of the mechanisms underlying metabolic
strategy, identiﬁcation of crucial biomarkers that can be

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

REVIEW

Reprogramming metabolomics

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was sponsored by grants from Science and Technology
Program of Guangzhou (201504010025), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 41276145 and 31272702), the
National Basic Research Program (973 Program) (No.
2012CB114406), Doctoral Fund of Ministry of Education of China
(20120171110008).

ABBREVIATIONS
CE-MS, capillary electrophoresis coupled to mass spectrometry;
GC-MS, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry; IFN, interferon;
LC-MS, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry; mGWAS,

metabolite-based genome-wide association study; MS, mass spectrometry; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance.

COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICS GUIDELINES
Bo Peng, Hui Li and Xuanxian Peng declare that they have no
conﬂict of interest. This article does not contain any studies with
human or animal subjects performed by the any of the authors.

OPEN ACCESS
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to
the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

REFERENCES
Adamski J (2012) Genome-wide association studies with metabolomics. Genome Med 4:34
Adamski J, Suhre K (2013) Metabolomics platforms for genome
wide association studies—linking the genome to the metabolome. Curr Opin Biotechnol 224:39–47
Bhargava P, Collins JJ (2015) Boosting bacterial metabolism to
combat antibiotic resistance. Cell Metab 21:154–155
Bielecka M, Watanabe M, Morcuende R, Scheible WR, Hawkesford
MJ, Hesse H, Hoefgen R (2014) Transcriptome and metabolome
analysis of plant sulphate starvation and resupply provides novel
information on transcriptional regulation of metabolism associated with sulphur, nitrogen and phosphorus nutritional responses
in Arabidopsis. Front Plant Sci 5:805
Brennan L (2014) NMR-based metabolomics: from sample preparation to applications in nutrition research. Prog Nucl Magn
Reson Spectrosc 83:42–49
Budczies J, Pﬁtzner BM, Györffy B, Winzer KJ, Radke C, Dietel M,
Fiehn O, Denkert C (2015) Glutamate enrichment as new
diagnostic opportunity in breast cancer. Inter J Cancer
136:1619–1628
Carey BW, Finley LW, Cross JR, Allis CD, Thompson CB (2015)
Intracellular α-ketoglutarate maintains the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. Nature 518:413–416
Castro-Santos P, Laborde CM, Diaz-Pena R (2015) Genomics,
proteomics and metabolomics: their emerging roles in the
discovery and validation of rheumatoid arthritis biomarkers. Clin
Exp Rheumatol 33:279–286
Cheng ZX, Ma YM, Li H, Peng XX (2014) N-acetylglucosamine
enhances survival ability of tilapias infected by Streptococcus
iniae. Fish Shellﬁsh Immunol 40:524–530
Commisso M, Strazzer P, Toffali K, Stocchero M, Guzzo F (2013)
Untargeted metabolomics: an emerging approach to determine the
composition of herbal products. Comput Struct Biotechnol J 4:1–7
Do KT, Kastenmuller G, Mook-Kanamori DO, Yousri NA, Theis FJ,
Suhre K, Krumsiek J (2015) Network-based approach for
analyzing intra- and interﬂuid metabolite associations in human
blood, urine, and saliva. J Proteome Res 14:1183–1194

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

635

Protein & Cell

efﬁcient for reprogramming metabolome, and disclosing of the
reprogramming mechanisms. While gene-to-metabolite and
protein-to-metabolite analysis by mGWAS and integrated
OMICs provides a useful tool for improvement of crucial biomarker identiﬁcation and mechanism understanding, the
regulation of metabolites to other molecules including proteins
and nucleic acids and the clariﬁcation of metabolic ﬂuxes by
exogenous metabolites are a useful clue to understanding the
reprogramming mechanisms.
The reprogramming metabolomics described in this paper
has so far only been ‘the beginning’, but the approach has
proven to be useful tools for reconstitution of an aimed metabolome and understanding of the reconstitution mechanisms,
such as reverting ‘antibiotic-resistant metabolome’ to ‘antibiotic-susceptible metabolome’ by promoting the TCA cycle,
NADH and proton motive force and thereby increasing
antibiotic uptake (Peng et al., 2015a; Su et al., 2015). Particular attention should be paid to identify highly efﬁcient reprogramming metabolites that result in reinforcing host’s
metabolic strategy against adverse factors and reverting
microbes’ resistant-metabolomes to susceptible-metabolomes to killing. The identiﬁcation should be based on understanding of metabolic proﬁle, clariﬁcation of metabolic
pathways and network, and disclosing of metabolic mechanisms. Furthermore, the synergistic use of reprogramming
compounds can elevate then reprogramming effects (Peng
et al., 2015a), which highlights the way to boost the reprogramming output. A further factor that may be neglected is the
clariﬁcation of metabolic ﬂuxes caused by exogenous reprogramming metabolites. The metabolic ﬂuxes play a crucial role
in reconstitution of the reinforcing or reverting metabolomes,
determination of the reconstitution effect and understanding of
the reprogramming mechanisms. Finally, the goal to be pursued in the future will be to transfer these approaches to
clinical use by identifying efﬁcient reprogramming metabolites
as drugs. Since metabolites are generally non-poisonous to
organisms, the use of the reprogramming drugs becomes
relatively simple, which brings the gospel to human heath,
animal feed and aquaculture. Therefore, the reprogramming
metabolomics will provide an alternative way for nutrition care,
physical recovery, disease prevention and treatment.

Protein & Cell

REVIEW

Bo Peng et al.

Dörries K, Schlueter R, Lalk M (2014) Impact of antibiotics with
various target sites on the metabolome of Staphylococcus
aureus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 58:7151–7163
Dudka I, Kossowska B, Senhadri H, Latajka R, Hajek J, Andrzejak
R, Antonowicz-Juchniewicz J, Gancarz R (2014) Metabonomic
analysis of serum of workers occupationally exposed to arsenic,
cadmium and lead for biomarker research: a preliminary study.
Environ Int 68:71–81
Dumas ME (2012) Metabolome 2.0: quantitative genetics and network
biology of metabolic phenotypes. Mol Biosyst 8:2494–2502
Dumas ME, Kinross J, Nicholson JK (2014) Metabolic phenotyping
and systems biology approaches to understanding metabolic
syndrome and fatty liver disease. Gastroenterol 146:46–62
Farag MA, Porzel A, Mahrous EA, El-Massry MM, Wessjohann LA
(2015) Integrated comparative metabolite proﬁling via MS and
NMR techniques for Senna drug quality control analysis. Anal
Bioanal Chem 407:1937–1949
Feng Q, Liang S, Jia H, Stadlmayr A, Tang L, Lan Z, Zhang D et al
(2015) Gut microbiome development along the colorectal adenoma–carcinoma sequence. Nat Commun 6:6528
Floegel A, Wientzek A, Bachlechner U, Jacobs S, Drogan D, Prehn
C, Adamski J, Krumsiek J, Schulze M, Pischon T (2014) Linking
diet, physical activity, cardiorespiratory ﬁtness and obesity to
serum metabolite networks: ﬁndings from a population-based
study. Int J Obes (Lond) 38:1388–1396
Fuhrer T, Zamboni N (2015) High-throughput discovery metabolomics. Curr Opin Biotechnol 31:73–78
Gao P, Xu G (2015) Mass-spectrometry-based microbial metabolomics: recent developments and applications. Anal Bioanal
Chem 407:669–680
Ghartey J, Bastek JA, Brown AG, Anglim L, Elovitz MA (2015)
Women with preterm birth have a distinct cervicovaginal
metabolome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:776-e1
Gibbons H, O’Gorman A, Brennan L (2015) Metabolomics as a tool
in nutritional research. Curr Opin Lipidol 26:30–34
Helms JB, Kaloyanova DV, Strating JR, van Hellemond JJ, van der
Schaar HM, Tielens AG, van Kuppeveld FJ, Brouwers JF (2015)
Targeting of the hydrophobic metabolome by pathogens. Trafﬁc
16:439–460
Holmes E, Wilson ID, Nicholson JK (2008) Metabolic phenotyping in
health and disease. Cell 134:714–717
Jorge TF, Rodrigues JA, Caldana C, Schmidt R, van Dongen JT,
Thomas‐Oates J, António C (2015). Mass spectrometry‐based
plant metabolomics: Metabolite responses to abiotic stress. Mass
Spectrom Rev. doi:10.1002/mas.21449
Kim D, Fiske BP, Birsoy K, Freinkman E, Kami K, Possemato RL,
Chudnovsky Y et al (2015) SHMT2 drives glioma cell survival in
ischaemia but imposes a dependence on glycine clearance.
Nature 520:363–367
Klähn S, Orf, Schwarz D, Matthiessen JK, Kopka J, Hess WR,
Hagemann M (2015). Integrated transcriptomic and metabolomic
characterization of the low-carbon response using an ndhR
mutant of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Plant Physiol, 144
Krug D, Müller R (2014) Secondary metabolomics: the impact of
mass spectrometry-based approaches on the discovery and
characterization of microbial natural products. Nat Prod Rep
31:768–783

636

Kumar B, Prakash A, Ruhela RK, Medhi B (2014) Potential of
metabolomics in preclinical and clinical drug development.
Pharmacol Rep 66:956–963
Kusuda H, Koga W, Kusano M, Oikawa A, Saito K, Hirai MY, Yoshida
KT (2015) Ectopic expression of myo-inositol 3-phosphate
synthase induces a wide range of metabolic changes and
confers salt tolerance in rice. Plant Sci 232:49–56
Li PP, Liu XJ, Li H, Peng XX (2012) Downregulation of Na (+)–NQR
complex is essential for Vibrio alginolyticus in resistance to
baloﬂoxacin. J Proteomics 75:2638–2648
Lin XM, Yang MJ, Li H, Wang C, Peng XX (2014) Decreased
expression of LamB and Odp1 complex is crucial for antibiotic
resistance in Escherichia coli. J Proteomics 98:244–253
Liu X, Zhang CC, Liu Z, Wei L, Liu YJ, Yu J, Sun LX (2014) LCbased targeted metabolomics analysis of nucleotides and identiﬁcation of biomarkers associated with chemotherapeutic drugs
in cultured cell models. Anti Cancer Drugs 25:690–703
Ma YM, Yang MJ, Wang S, Li H, Peng XX (2015) Liver functional
metabolomics discloses an action of L-leucine against Streptococcus iniae infection intilapias. Fish Shellﬁsh Immunol 45:414–421
Mahrous EA, Farag MA (2015) Two dimensional NMR spectroscopic
approaches for exploring plant metabolome: A review. J Adv Res
6:3–15
Mastrangelo A, Armitage EG, García A, Barbas C (2014) Metabolomics as a tool for drug discovery and personalised medicine. A
review. Curr Top Med Chem 14:2627–2636
Matsuda R, Bi C, Anguizola J, Sobansky M, Rodriguez E, Badilla JV,
Zheng X, Hage B, Hage DS (2014) Studies of metabolite–protein
interactions: a review. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed
Life Sci 966:48–58
Nakabayashi R, Saito K (2015) Integrated metabolomics for abiotic
stress responses in plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol 24:10–16
Osanai T, Oikawa A, Iijima H, Kuwahara A, Asayama M, Tanaka K,
Ikeuchi M, Saito K, Hirai MY (2014) Metabolomic analysis reveals
rewiring of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 primary metabolism by
ntcA overexpression. Environ Microbiol 16:3304–3317
Patel S, Ahmed S (2015) Emerging ﬁeld of metabolomics: big
promise for cancer biomarker identiﬁcation and drug discovery.
J Pharm Biomed Anal 107:63–74
Peng XX (2013) Proteomics and its applications to aquaculture in
China: Infection, immunity, and interaction of aquaculture hosts
with pathogens. Dev Comp Immunol 39:63–71
Peng B, Su YB, Li H, Han Y, Guo C, Tian YM, Peng XX (2015a)
Exogenous alanine and/or glucose plus kanamycin kills antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Cell Metab 21:249–261
Peng S, Zhang J, Liu L, Zhang X, Huang Q, Alamdar A, Tian M,
Shen H (2015b) Newborn meconium and urinary metabolome
response to maternal gestational diabetes mellitus: a preliminary
case–control study. J Proteome Res 14:1799–1809
Ramautar R, Somsen GW, de Jong GJ (2015) CE-MS for
metabolomics: developments and applications in the period
2012–2014. Electrophoresis 36:212–224
Rojo D, Gosalbes MJ, Ferrari R, Pérez-Cobas AE, Hernández E,
Oltra R, Buesa J, Latorre A, Barbas C, Ferrer M (2015).
Clostridium difﬁcile heterogeneously impacts intestinal community architecture but drives stable metabolome responses. ISME
J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2015.32

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

Su YB, Peng B, Han Y, Li H, Peng XX (2015) Fructose restores
susceptibility of multidrug-resistant Edwardsiella tarda to kanamycin. J Proteome Res 14:1612–1620
Suhre K, Shin SY, Petersen AK, Mohney RP, Meredith D, Wägele B,
Altmaier E, Deloukas P, Erdmann J, Grundberg E (2011) Human
metabolic individuality in biomedical and pharmaceutical
research. Nature 477:54–60
Sun CX, Li MQ, Gao XX, Liu LN, Wu XF, Zhou JH (2015). Metabolic
response of maize plants to multi-factorial abiotic stresses. Plant
Biol (Stuttg). doi:10.1111/plb.12305
Tannahill GM, Curtis AM, Adamik J, Palsson-McDermott EM,
McGettrick AF, Goel G, Frezza C et al (2013) Succinate is an
inﬂammatory signal that induces IL-1β through HIF-1α. Nature
496:238–242
Vázquez-Fresno R, Llorach R, Urpi-Sarda M, Lupianez-Barbero A,
Estruch R, Corella D, Fitó M, Arós F, Ruiz-Canela M, SalasSalvadó J (2014) Metabolomic pattern analysis after mediterranean diet intervention in a nondiabetic population: a 1-and
3-year follow-up in the PREDIMED study. J Proteome Res
14:531–540
Wagner ND, Lankadurai BP, Simpson MJ, Simpson AJ, Frost PC
(2015) Metabolomic differentiation of nutritional stress in an
aquatic invertebrate. Physiol Biochem Zool 88:43–52
Wang X, Mu X, Zhang J, Huang Q, Alamdar A, Tian M, Liu L, Shen H
(2015) Serum metabolomics reveals that arsenic exposure
disrupted lipid and amino acid metabolism in rats: a step forward
in understanding chronic arsenic toxicity. Metallomics 7:544–552
Weckmann K, Labermaier C, Asara J, Müller M, Turck C (2014)
Time-dependent metabolomic proﬁling of Ketamine drug action

reveals hippocampal pathway alterations and biomarker candidates. Transl Psychiatry 4:e481
Wolfender JL, Marti G, Thomas A, Bertrand S (2015) Current
approaches and challenges for the metabolite proﬁling of
complex natural extracts. J Chromatogr A 1382:136–164
Wu CW, Zhao XL, Wu XJ, Wen C, Li H, Chen XH, Peng XX (2015)
Exogenous glycine and serine promote growth and antifungal
activity of Penicillium citrinum W1 from the Southwest Indian
Ocean. FEMS Microbiol Lett 362:fnv040
Zhang J, Shen H, Xu W, Xia Y, Barr DB, Mu X, Wang X, Liu L, Huang
Q, Tian M (2014) Urinary metabolomics revealed arsenic internal
dose-related metabolic alterations: a proof-of-concept study in a
Chinese male cohort. Environ Sci Technol 48:12265–12274
Zhang Y, Zhao F, Deng Y, Zhao Y, Ren H (2015) Metagenomic and
metabolomic analysis of the toxic effects of trichloroacetamideinduced gut microbiome and urine metabolome perturbations in
mice. J Proteome Res 14:1752–1761
Zhao XL, Wu CW, Peng XX, Li H (2014) Interferon-α2b against
microbes through promoting biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty
acids. J Proteome Res 13:4155–4163
Zhao XL, Han Y, Ren ST, Ma YM, Li H, Peng XX (2015) L-proline
increases survival of tilapias infected by Streptococcus agalactiae in higher water temperature. Fish Shellﬁsh Immunol 44:33–
42
Zheng H, Kim J, Liew M, Yan JK, Herrera O, Bok JW, Kelleher NL,
Keller NP, Wang Y (2015) Redox metabolites signal polymicrobial
bioﬁlm development via the NapA oxidative stress cascade in
aspergillus. Curr Biol 25:29–37

© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com and journal.hep.com.cn

637

Protein & Cell

REVIEW

Reprogramming metabolomics

