Hindawi Publishing Corporation
International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
Volume 2012, Article ID 282574, 40 pages
doi:10.1155/2012/282574

Review Article
Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry:
A Technique to Access the Information beyond
the Molecular Weight of the Analyte
Shibdas Banerjee and Shyamalava Mazumdar
Department of Chemical Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Homi Bhabha Road, Colaba, Mumbai 400005, India
Correspondence should be addressed to Shyamalava Mazumdar, shyamal@tifr.res.in
Received 9 August 2011; Revised 23 October 2011; Accepted 9 November 2011
Academic Editor: Troy D. Wood
Copyright © 2012 S. Banerjee and S. Mazumdar. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
The Electrospray Ionization (ESI) is a soft ionization technique extensively used for production of gas phase ions (without fragmentation) of thermally labile large supramolecules. In the present review we have described the development of Electrospray Ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) during the last 25 years in the study of various properties of diﬀerent types of biological molecules. There have been extensive studies on the mechanism of formation of charged gaseous species by the ESI. Several groups have
investigated the origin and implications of the multiple charge states of proteins observed in the ESI-mass spectra of the proteins.
The charged analytes produced by ESI can be fragmented by activating them in the gas-phase, and thus tandem mass spectrometry
has been developed, which provides very important insights on the structural properties of the molecule. The review will highlight
recent developments and emerging directions in this fascinating area of research.

1. Introduction
The basic concepts of chemistry originated from the quantitative estimation (e.g., weighing) of the constituents in a
chemical reaction during the period of Lavoisier more than
200 years ago. Since then the analytical measurement of
masses of the samples continuously evolved through the gravimetric analysis to weighing a single atom/molecule using
the modern instrument called mass spectrometer. In mass
spectrometry, a particular state of matter called gaseous ionic
state is studied by transferring the analytes from condensed
phase to the gas phase followed by their ionization. The
success of the study of gas-phase ion chemistry and its application has been driven by the continuous advancement of
the mass spectrometric technique since the studies were performed by Thomson [1]. As a result the mass spectrometry
has become one of the most sensitive analytical methods
for the structural characterization of molecules. Before
the development of ESI-MS, there were several ionization
methods (electron ionization, chemical ionization, etc.), but
none of them could be able to overcome the propensity

of the analyte fragmentation. In the mid 1980s, it became
indispensable to precisely measure the molecular mass of
the biologically important supramolecules like proteins [2].
But the proteins are polar, nonvolatile, and thermally labile
molecules. So the ionization of the proteins by conventional
ionization methods could lead to structural destruction.
Although a technique called fast atom bombardment (FAB)
[3] was available that time for the ionization of the biological samples, this technique produces predominantly singly
charged ions of the analyte and the method works best for
smaller species of mass below about 1000 Da. However, the
available mass analyzers could not measure the high m/z
value of the singly charged high molecular weight proteins
during those days. So the only way to analyze the protein
mass was to digest the protein and then the analysis of the
digest mixture by FAB-mass spectrometry.
All those problems were overcome in 1989 when Fenn
introduced electrospray ionization, a soft ionization technique, to ionize intact chemical species (proteins) by multiple charging [4]. The ionization is soft in the sense that a very
little residual energy is retained by the analyte, and generally

2
no fragmentation occurs upon ionization. Not only that but
also very weak noncovalent interactions are preserved in
the gas phase [5]. Because of the multiple charging, the
m/z values of the resulting ions become lower and fall in
the mass ranges of all common mass analyzers. Thus ESI
became very useful in the production of gas-phase ions from
large biologically important macromolecules like proteins
and nucleic acids, and their subsequent mass spectrometric
analysis for structural characterization as well as their rapid
identification on the basis of molecular mass, a very specific
property of the analyte. Gradually a systematic analysis of
proteins with the mass spectrometry as the central tool led
to a discrete subject called “Proteomics,” one of the fastest
growing research areas in the chemical sciences [6].
In 2002 Fenn, the inventor of ESI-MS shared the 4th
Nobel Prize in mass spectrometry along with Koichi Tanaka
(for the development of MALDI mass spectrometry, another
soft ionization technique) and Kurt Wuthrich (for the work
in NMR spectroscopy). “A few years ago the idea of making
proteins or polymers “fly” by electrospray ionization (ESI)
seemed as improbable as a flying elephant, but today it is
a standard part of modern mass spectrometers” as stated
by the Professor Fenn in his Nobel lecture [7]. Nowadays
ESI-MS is not only being used as a balance to weigh protein molecules but also to gain a deeper understanding of the
protein three-dimensional structures, noncovalent interaction, posttranslation modification, and amino acid sequence.
Soft landing of the mass-selected multiply charged gaseous
protein ions into liquids (after the mass spectrometric separation) was recently shown to retain the native structures
and even the biological activities of some proteins [8, 9].
Although the development of ESI-MS has had a major
impact in biology and proteomics, its application has extended to a broad range of analytes including polar organic [10],
inorganic [11], and metal-organic complexes [12]. Recently
ESI eﬃciency scale of the diﬀerent organic molecules with
diﬀerent polarities has been developed [13, 14]. The best
ESI response has been observed for the analytes with ionizable basic/acidic polar functional groups. High-performance
liquid chromatography has been coupled with the ESI-MS
for the molecular fractionation prior to mass-spectrometric
analysis. Thus, HPLC/ESI-MS has become a very powerful
technique capable of analyzing both small and large molecules of various polarities in a complex biological sample
mixture.
Here we would briefly review the development of the ESIMS technique in last two and half decades not only for the
mass access but also for the detailed understanding of the
structural properties of the analyte in the diﬀerent aspects
of chemistry and biology including the fundamentals of the
ionization mechanisms.

2. The Historical Perspective
There is an interesting history behind the development of
ESI-MS. Although the process electrospray was known more
than hundred years ago [15], the actual thought process on
ESI-MS was initiated by Professor Dole, a physical chemist
at Northwestern University. Much of the Dole’s research

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
focused on the polymerization chemistry. In the 1960s he
was trying to characterize the size as well as mass distribution
of some synthetic polymers (originally polystyrene) by mass
spectrometric technique. But that time the troubles he encountered were the lack of a suitable ionization system which
can produce molecular ions (without decomposing their
structures) in the gas phase from the highly nonvolatile synthetic polymers and also the unavailability of the suitable
detector system which can probe the appearance of the large
molecular ions with high m/z value. Accidently he discovered
the existence of electrospray while visiting a car manufacturer, and he observed the car painting by a process called
electrospray. Then he applied the electrospray process in
the production of gas-phase polystyrene ions and their subsequent collection using a Faraday cage detector [16, 17].
Although their experiments showed that the electrospray is
a very promising soft ionization (no fragmentation of the
analyte) technique, no mass spectrometer was available that
time to separate and detect the ions of polystyrene molecules.
However, Dole’s report [16, 17] on electrospray got the
attention of Professor Seymour Lipsky and Professor Csaba
Horvath at Yale Medical School [2]. That time (1970s)
Professor Lipsky was thinking about the alternate ways of
ionizing biopolymers like proteins, and Professor Horvath
was to work on the development of HPLC known as highpressure liquid chromatography. They noticed that two of
the Dole’s reports referred the work of Fenn who was a professor in the Yale Engineering Department that time. Fenn
was a specialist in the field of molecular beams and their
production by nozzle-skimmer systems. Through those references Lipsky got in touch with Fenn. Fenn accepted the
challenge of the production of biomolecular ions in the gas
phase using his molecular beam apparatus even though he
was approaching 65, typical retirement age [2]. Finally Fenn
group’s ground breaking discovery on the ionization and
characterization of large biomolecules in the gas phase by
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry [4] created a
new dimension in the field of proteomics. After the Fenn’s
discovery of ESI-MS technique, the uses of the electrospray
ionization continue to grow at an unprecedented rate (see
Figure 1), and every day new applications are developed as
the instrument continues to advance as fast as the need.

3. Basic Architecture of
the ESI-Mass Spectrometer
Like other mass spectrometers, ESI-mass spectrometer is
also composed of three basic components, for example,
ion source, mass analyzer, and detector (see Figure 2). The
intact molecular ions (not truly ions, see later) are produced
in the ionization chamber where the ion source is kept, and
then they are transferred in the mass analyzer region via
several ion optics (electromagnetic elements like skimmer,
focusing lens, multipole, etc.), which are basically kept to
focus the ion stream to maintain a stable trajectory of
the ions. The mass analyzer sorts and separates the ions
according to their mass to charge ratio (m/z value). The
separated ions are then passed to the detector systems to
measure their concentration, and the results are displayed on

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

3

Number of publications

2100
1800
1500
1200
900
600
300
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

0

Year

Figure 1: Yearly histogram of the papers dealing with the use of
electrospray ionization after the Fenn’s introduction of electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry to ionize the biomolecules in 1989.
The information was obtained by searching ISI Web of Knowledge
on 26.06.2011 for the term “Electrospray ionization.”

Ion
source

Mass
analyzer

Detector

Intensity

Sample

m/z

High vacuum

Figure 2: The basic components of the ESI-mass spectrometer.

a chart called a mass spectrum (see Figure 2). Since the ions
in the gas phase are very reactive and often short lived, their
formation and manipulation should be conducted in high
vacuum. For this reason the ion optics, analyzer, and also
the detectors are kept at very high vacuum (typically from
10−3 torr to 10−6 torr pressure). Mass spectrometers typically
use either oil diﬀusion pumps or turbomolecular pumps to
achieve the high vacuum required to operate the instrument.
Generally the ion source is kept at atmospheric pressure, and
a continuous pressure gradient and voltage gradient are used
from source to the detector to help pump out the ions from
source to the detector through the analyzer.
3.1. Ion Source. A suitable ESI source for the mass-spectrometric analysis was designed by the Fenn group in the mid
1980s [4, 18–20]. Later on it was modified by diﬀerent
research groups to improve the system’s robustness [21–25].
Generally a dilute (less than mM in polar volatile solvent)
analyte solution is injected by a mechanical syringe pump
through a hypodermic needle or stainless steel capillary
(∼0.2 mm o.d and ∼0.1 mm i.d) at low flow rate (typically 1–
20 μL/min). A very high voltage (2–6 kV) is applied to the tip
of the metal capillary relative to the surrounding source-sampling cone or heated capillary (typically located at 1–3 cm
from the spray needle tip). This strong electric field causes
the dispersion of the sample solution into an aerosol of highly
charged electrospray (ES) droplets (see Figure 3). A coaxial

sheath gas (dry N2 ) flow around the capillary results in better
nebulization. This gas flow also helps to direct the spray
emerging from the capillary tip towards the mass spectrometer. The charged droplets diminish in size by solvent evaporation, assisted by the flow of nitrogen (drying gas).
Finally the charged analytes are released from the droplets, some of which pass through a sampling cone or the orifice of a heated capillary (kept in the interface of atmospheric
pressure and the high vacuum) into the analyser of the mass
spectrometer, which is held under high vacuum. The heated
capillary (typically 0.2 mm inner diameter, 60 mm in length
and heated to 100–300◦ C) causes the complete desolvation
of the ions passing through it. The use of drying gas and the
heated capillary can influence the system’s robustness and
reduce the degree of cluster ion formation [24]. The transfer of analyte ions from solution to gas phase is not an energetic process, but rather the desolvation process eﬀectively
cools the gaseous ions. So the analyte ions with low internal
energies are allowed to enter into the mass spectrometer from
the electrospray probe, and the structure of the analytes generally remain intact (no fragmentation) when appropriate
instrumental conditions (e.g., no activation of the ions in
gas phase) are used. Nowadays a number of sprayer modifications like pneumatically assisted electrospray [26–28],
ultrasonic nebulizer electrospray [29, 30], electrosonic spray
[31], and nanoelectrospray [23, 32] have been developed to
expand the range of ESI applications. Among them the most
popular one is nanoelectrospray.
Nanospray ionization is a low flow rate (20–50 nL/min)
version of electrospray ionization [32]. A very low sample
concentration (nanomole/mL) and low volume are required
for nanospraying. Such downscaling has been achieved by
replacing the spray needle with borosilicate glass capillary of
some microliters volume to which a fine tip (1–4 μm inner
diameter) is pulled with a micropipette puller. The spray
voltage of 0.7–1.1 kV is normally applied via an electrically
conducting coating (usually a sputtered gold film) on the
outer surface of the spray capillary. When the high voltage is
switched on, the analyte solution flow is solely driven by capillary forces refilling the aperture as droplets are leaving the
tip. While conventional ESI generates initial charged droplets of 1-2 μm in diameter, the nanospray produces the
charged droplets of the less than 200 nm diameter; that is,
their volume is about 100–1000 times smaller than the droplets produced by a conventional microemitter. The nanoESI has an increased tolerance to high aqueous solvents and
salt contamination [23, 32]. In this technique not only less
analyte sample is consumed than with the standard electrospray ionization, but also a small volume of sample lasts for
several minutes, thus enabling multiple experiments to be
performed.
3.2. Mass Analyzer. The mass analyzer is the heart of the mass
spectrometer. The mass analyzer can be compared with the
prism. The component wavelengths of a light are separated
by a prism, and then they are detected by an optical receptor.
Similarly in the mass analyzer, the diﬀerent types of ions
(m/z) of an ion beam are separated, and then they are passed
to the detector. There are many types of mass analyzers

4

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
Ionization chamber/atmospheric pressure region Mass spectrometer,
high vacuum region
±2–6 kV
Analyte in
solution

Analyte in
gas phase

N2 (g) flow
(sheath gas)

N2 (g) flow
Heated capillary
(100–300◦ C)

Spray needle
Charged ES droplets (aerosol)

Source sampling cone

Figure 3: A schematic representation of the ESI-ion source.

[33, 34], for example, magnetic (B)/electric (E) sector mass
analyzer, linear quadrupole ion trap (LIT), three-dimensional quadrupole ion trap (QIT) [35], orbitrap, time-offlight mass analyzer (TOF), and ion cyclotron resonance
mass analyzer (ICR), all of these which use the static or
dynamic magnetic/electric field, and all operate according to
two fundamental laws of physics, for example, Lorentz force
law and Newton’s second law of motion. Proper selection of
the mass analyzer depends on the resolution, mass range,
scan rate, and detection limit required for an application.
Although the detailed discussion of diﬀerent types of mass
analyzers is beyond the scope of this paper, interested readers
can go through any standard mass spectrometry text book
for this issue.
3.3. Detector. The simplest way to detect the ion is the use of
Faraday cup, where the ion is allowed to be neutralized and
the resulting current is measured. This Faraday cup is used
when the ion flux is relatively large. But a more modern way
to measure the low ion flux is the use of electron multiplier (just like photomultiplier tube to measure the photon
flux) [36, 37]. The energetic ions are allowed to strike a
metal or semiconductor plate (e.g., copper/beryllium alloy
oxide) called a conversion dynode that emits secondary electrons (SE). This conversion dynode is held at very high voltage (order of kV). The secondary electrons emitted are accelerated and focused onto the second and subsequent dynodes
(kept in positive potentials), which are set at potentials progressively closer to earth. At each dynode there is an increase
in the number of electrons emitted (electron avalanche),
such that at the end of the multiplier a gain of approximately
106 is achieved. The output current is converted to a voltage
signal, which finally can be translated to an intensity value
(the ordinate axis of the mass spectrum) by means of an
analog-to-digital (ADC) converter. There are several types
of multipliers like discrete dynode electron multipliers [36,
37], channel electron multipliers (CEMs) [34], microchannel
or multichannel plates (MCPs) [34], and so forth. Unlike
other mass spectrometers, ions are not detected by hitting a
detector such as an electron multiplier in FT-ICR-MS [38],
but ions are detected by the measurement of the image

current produced by ions cyclotroning in the presence of a
magnetic field. A detector is selected according to its speed,
dynamic range, gain, and geometry. Some detectors are sensitive enough to detect a single ion. Although there has been
a revolution in the mass spectrometer development in the
last twenty years by several researchers and companies, the
question regarding the response of the detector haunts the
researchers till now. How does the detector respond to the
large multiply charged ions produced by ESI? No precise
information is available regarding the fact whether the observed peak height corresponding to a multiply charged macroion reflects the number of incident ions, the number of
charges they carry, the conformation of the ion, the energy
of incidence, its velocity, or an unknown combination of
these factors [39]. Though it is assumed that a peak height
in a mass spectrum is directly proportional to the number
of corresponding incident ions to the detector, this issue
still remains suspicious as the detector response has not
been characterized appropriately in those aspects mentioned
above [39].
Figure 4 shows some hybrid mass spectrometers (commercially available) which are constructed by combining different types of m/z separation devices or mass analyzers. Different types of detectors and spray (ion source) geometries
are also noticeable in those instruments (Figures 4(a)–4(c)).
These instruments are specially designed for the tandem
mass analysis (see later). The trajectory of the ions from
ion source to the analyzer is linear (on-axis/line-of-sight) in
conventional electrospray sources (Figure 4(a)). But, recently
the spray geometries have been modified to orthogonal
spray (Figure 4(b)) or z-spray (Figure 4(c)) where the ion
trajectory from source to the analyzer is, respectively, orthogonal and z shaped. These oﬀ-axis spray geometries circumvent the problem of the clogging of heated capillaries and
skimmers by neutral molecules, nonvolatile materials, and so
forth.

4. The ESI-Mass Spectrum
Generally the ions derived by ES process are multiply charged, and the analyte remains intact (no fragmentation) when

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

5
Conversion
dynode

Ring electrode
Skimmer
Heated capillary

Gating lens

Pump 1

Tube lens

Octapole

“In-line” electrospray
source

Ion trap

Pump 2

Quadrupole

End cap

End cap

Multiplier

(a)

Orthogonal
electrospray source

Skimmer

Conversion
dynode

Gating lenses

Octapole

Quadrupole

Quadrupole

Q1

Heated capillary

Quadrupole

q2

Q3
Multiplier

Collision cell

Rough pump

Single 3-stage turbo pump

Turbo pump

(b)

Z-spray ion
source

Quadrupole

Z-shape ion
trajectory
N2 (g) flow

Vacuum pump

Hexapole

MCP
Detector

Pusher

Collision cell

Hexapole
transfer optics

Reflectron

Skimmer

Vacuum pump
TOF-MS
(c)

Figure 4: Schematic of the (a) thermo-Finnigan LCQ Deca mass spectrometer (on-axis spray), (b) Agilent 6410 Triple Quad LC/MS system
(oﬀ-axis/orthogonal spray), and (c) Waters Micromass Q-TOF Ultima ESI-MS (z-spray).

appropriate instrumental conditions are used. In positive ion
mode (when the spraying nozzle is kept at positive potential)
the charging generally occurs via protonation (sometimes
metalation also), but in negative ion mode (when the spraying nozzle is kept at negative potential) charging occurs via
deprotonation of the analyte. The mechanism of charging
has been discussed later. Since the charging of the analyte
occurs by transfer of protons, the ionic species detected are

not the true molecular ions (which are formed by the loss or
gain of the electron), but they are more preferably protonated
or deprotonated molecules [40]. When a pure analyte solution is electrosprayed all the peaks appearing in the corresponding ESI-mass spectrum represent the intact molecular
species with variable charging as shown in Figure 5. The ordinate or vertical axis represents the relative abundances of
multiply charged species of the same analyte, and the abscissa

6

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

Relative intensity (%)

n+
(n + 1)+

(n − 1)+

(n + 2)+

(n − 2)+

ESI-mass spectra. To quantify the charge state distribution of
the analyte, the term “average
 charge
 state” (Zav ) was introduced [45] and defined as zi · Ii / Ii , where Ii is the mass
spectrometrically detected signal intensity of a given charge
state (zi ) carried by the ith ion. Latter on several correlations
between this average charge state and the protein structures
were found (discussed later).

5. The Mechanism of Electrospray Ionization
m/z

Figure 5: A typical cartoon representing the nature of ESI-mass
spectrum in positive ion mode.

or horizontal axis represents the mass to charge ratio (m/z)
of the multiply charged analyte. As usual the most intense
or the tallest peak (peak of n+ charge in Figure 5) with
100% relative abundance is called the “base peak.” The
quantity m/z is dimensionless since it is the ration of two
dimensionless quantities mass number (m) and the elementary charges (z). Sometimes the unit Thomson [Th] is applied
to the m/z value to honor Thomson. Very often the symbol
“u” (unified atomic mass) or Da (Dalton, in biological mass
spectrometry field to honor J. Dalton) is also used as the
molecular mass unit.
Now the question is how one can determine the molecular mass of the analyte with the help of the ion signals
(diﬀerent m/z values) related to the same molecule? The
procedure of finding the charge and mass of the analyte
through the ESI-mass spectrum is called “Mathematical
Charge Deconvolution” [41–43]. The process is straightforward and based on the assumption that two adjacent peaks
in an ESI-mass spectrum of a single analyte have charge
state diﬀerence one as has been shown in Figure 5. If it is
assumed that the molecular mass of the analyte is M and the
observed m/z values for two neighboring charge states n+
and (n − 1)+ are m1 and m2 , respectively, then two mathematical equations can easily be drawn as (M + n)/n = m1
and [M + (n − 1)]/(n − 1) = m2 . Since there are only two
unknown parameters M and n, a minimum of two equations
are required to find out the values of M and n. So the above
two equations can easily be employed to determine the value
of n (charge state) and M (deconvoluted mass). One can
think the observed multiple peaks as the multiple mass
assessment of the same molecule. A more accurate mass of
the analyte can be derived by averaging the calculated mass
for each peak. The above algorithm works well for the pure
analyte and when the analyte produces the successive charge
states of the diﬀerence unity. But problems arise when the
analyte produces metaliated as well as protonated species in
gas phase or skips some charge state in between two observed charge states. Therefore, several refined procedures have
been developed to cope with these requirements [44]. Nowadays all the modern ESI-MS instruments are equipped with
elaborate software for charge deconvolution.
Proteins, the most popular analytes for ESI-MS study
exhibit diﬀerent charge state distribution profiles in their

After the development of ESI-MS, many diﬀerent assumptions and hypotheses were made in the early 1990s to interpret the multiple charging of the analyte by the ES process
[46–49]. That time it was thought that the distribution of
the charge states in the ESI-MS spectra actually reflects the
degree of charging of the analyte (say proteins) in the neutral
solution (as determined by solution phase equilibrium) [41,
50, 51]. But later it became evident that there is no correlation between solution charging and electrospray charging
after the report of Kelly and coworkers [47]. Their report
showed that in positive ion mode ESI produced protonated (positively charged) analyte (myoglobin) though the analyte is overall negatively charged (deprotonated) in basic
aspirating solution (pH 10), and in negative ion mode it produced deprotonated (negatively charged) analyte (myoglobin) though the analyte is overall positively charged (protonated) in acidic aspirating solution (pH 3). These observations implied that the charging process in ESI might occur in
an entirely diﬀerent manner than that it was thought.
When an analyte is transferred from solution to the gas
phase via ESI, the analyte solution undergoes three major
processes. These are (a) production of the charged droplets
from the high-voltage capillary tip where the analyte solution
is injected; (b) repeated solvent evaporation (from the charged droplet) and droplet disintegration, resulting a very small
charged droplet, which is able to produce the charged analyte; (c) finally a mechanism by which the gas-phase ion is
formed. Since the electrospray process existed long before its
application in the mass spectrometry and earlier it was used
for the electrostatic dispersion of liquids and the creation
of aerosol, the first two processes were mostly studied by
the researchers in the aerosol science, and the processes are
well understood nowadays [15, 52]. But the last process, that
is, the mechanisms of the ion formation from vary small
highly charged droplet is still under controversy, and the
exact process happening at this stage is not unambiguously
known. Over the last two decades, the issue has hotly been
discussed and debated, and several hypotheses based on the
theory and experimental evidences were invoked [22, 53, 54],
and here we would discuss the most popular models of the
gas-phase ion formation.
5.1. Production of Charged Droplets. When the analyte solution is pumped through the high-voltage capillary (emitter),
an electrochemical reaction of the solvent occurs which
causes an electron flow to or from the metal capillary depending on its polarity [55]. In absence of any redox active
analyte [56, 57], the oxidation of the solvent occurs in the
positive ion mode and reduction of the solvent occurs in the

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

7
Solvent
evaporation

Analyte molecule
Spraying nozzle
−
+

−

−+

+ ++
+
+ + +
+ + ++ +
+
++
+ +
++
− − +
e−

+
+
+
+

Naked charged
analyte

Coulomb
fission
+

+ + +
+
+
+

+ + +
Charged parent
droplet

+

++
++ ++
+
+
+
++ + +

+

+ve

Power supply

+
+
+

+ +
+ +

Charged droplet at
the Rayleigh limit

Taylor cone

+

+

+

+
+

+
+

Charged progeny
droplets

−ve

Figure 6: Schematic representation of the electrospray ionization process.

negative ion mode as has been shown in Table 1 [58]. So the
ES ion source could be “viewed as an electrolytic cell of a
special kind” [56]. These redox reactions (Table 1) supply
positive or negative ions in the solutions depending on
the polarity of the emitter electrode. Generally polar solvents (e.g., water, methanol, acetonitrile, etc.), which easily
undergo electrochemical reactions in the spraying nozzle,
are used in the ESI-MS experiments [58]. The accumulated
charges (positive or negative) would be repelled by the highvoltage capillary (of the same polarity), and then they would
drift towards the liquid surface at the capillary outlet (see
Figure 6). However, the accumulated like charges at the
surface are destabilized, and finally the meniscus would be
drawn out and deformed into a cone under the influenced of
a very high electric field (typically ∼106 V/m) [22, 58]. This
cone is called a Taylor cone [59] after the name of the scientist
Taylor who first theoretically described the conditions under
which a stable liquid cone can exist with the competing forces
of an electric field and the surface tension of the liquid [59].
This Taylor cone is the zone of high turbulence. At high
field strength, it immediately starts ejecting a fine jet of
liquid from its apex towards the counter electrode (heated
capillary) [60]. This charged jet easily breaks up into small
droplets. The droplets produced at low flow rate (typically
∼5 μL/min) have a narrow distribution of sizes with a most
abundant radius ∼1.5 μm [22]. Such an electrospray droplet
was shown to have a charge of ∼10−14 C, which corresponds
to ∼60,000 singly charged ions. All those charged droplets are
driven away from each other by Coulombic repulsion and
move along the direction of the electric fields (towards the
heated capillary) (see Figure 6). Overall, under positive ion
mode positively charged aerosol is formed and in negative
ion mode negatively charged aerosol is formed. The positive
charges are mostly contributed by protons, and negative
charges are contributed by some negative ions (e.g., OH− )
(see Table 1) [58].
5.2. Coulomb Explosion and Disintegration of the Charged
Droplets. The charges (say protons in positive ion mode) in
the droplets are distributed on its surface with equidistant
spacing to minimize the potential energy [39]. There are two
forces acting in opposite directions in the charged droplets.
One is surface tension of the charged droplet, which tries

to retain the spherical shape of the droplet, and the other
is Coulomb force of repulsion between the like charges on
the surface, which tries to break down the spherical shape
of the charged droplet [22, 39, 54, 58]. The solvent evaporation occurs when the droplets traverse the space between
spraying nozzle and the heated capillary (see Figure 6). As
a result the size of the droplet decreases until it reaches
the point (Rayleigh limit) [62] where the surface tension
can no longer sustain the Coulomb force of repulsion, and
at this point “Coulomb explosion” or “Coulomb fission”
occurs; that is, the parent droplet disintegrates into much
smaller oﬀspring droplets. The emitted stream of the oﬀspring/progeny droplets holds about 2% mass and 15%
charge of the parent droplet [22]. So the oﬀspring droplets
are not only much smaller than their parent but also have
much higher charge-to-mass ratio. The process of solvent
evaporation and Coulomb fission occurs repeatedly to generate smaller and smaller progeny droplets and finally the
charged nanodroplets from which the gas-phase charged
analyte molecule is formed [22, 63]. Figure 7 describes the
detail evolution of the initial droplets, formed from the
Taylor cone, to the droplets that are the precursor of the gasphase ions. Typically the flying microdroplets were observed
to vibrate alternately from oblate to prolate shapes, and this
elastic vibration causes the parent droplet to emit a tail
of much smaller oﬀspring droplets (droplet jet fission) [22,
53, 64] as has been shown in the inset of Figure 7. This disruption pattern is quite similar to the disruption at the Taylor
cone. Therefore, the charge density on the droplet surface is
not homogeneous, but significantly increased in the region of
sharper curvature, and it has been shown the charged microdroplets fission somewhat before, at ∼80% of the Rayleigh
limit [22]. The concept of this charged droplet jet fission is
based on theoretical as well as experimental evidence (flash
microphotographs) [64–66]. The life time of an ES droplet
largely dependent on several parameters like ion spray voltage, nature of the solvents, sheath gas flow rate, distance between the spraying nozzle and heated capillary and temperature of the heated capillary, and so forth, [22, 28] and that
would in turn aﬀect the charging of the analyte. However,
the average life time of a charged droplet produced by the
ES process is around one to a few milliseconds for typical
interfaces that one would use in ESI-MS [22, 67].

8

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

Table 1: Typical redox reactions of the solvents expected to occur in the electrospray emitter and their corresponding standard potentials.
Solvent systems

Water

Methanol

Positive-ion mode
Oxidation reactions
2H2 O = O2 + 4H+ + 2e−
2H2 O = H2 O2 + 2H+ + 2e−
H2 O = HO∗ + H+ + e−

E 0 (V)
1.23
1.77
2.72

CH3 OH = HCHO + 2H+ + 2e−
CH3 OH + H2 O = HCOOH + 4H+ + 4e−
HCOOH = CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−
N = 51250
R = 1.5 μm

0.23
0.10
−0.20

Negative-ion mode
Reduction reactions
2H2 O + O2 + 4e− = 4OH−
H2 O + O−2 + e− = HO−2 + OH−
H2 O + HO−2 + e− = HO∗ + 2OH−
2H2 O + 2e− = H2 + 2OH−
2H2 O + O2 + 2e− = H2 O2 + 2OH−
H2 O + O2 + 2e− = HO−2 + OH−
CH3 OH + H2 O + 2e− = CH4 + 2OH−
CH3 OH + 2H+ + 2e− = CH4 + H2 O

E 0 (V)
0.40
0.20
0.18
0.07
−0.13
−0.83
−0.25
0.58

51250
0.945
Δt = 462 μs
43560
0.848
43560
0.939

Δt = 74 μs
37026
0.761

+
384
0.09

···

37026
0.844

20 droplets
326
0.08

Δt = 70 μs
+
···

31472
0.756
278
0.07

278
0.03

+
Δt = 39 μs

236
0.03

+

2
0.003

Figure 7: Time history of the charged methanol droplet produced by microelectrospray process. The droplet at the top left is a typical parent
droplet created at the ES capillary tip. The successive solvent evaporation and Coulomb fission leads to the charged nanodroplets that are the
precursors of the gas-phase analyte ions. The numbers beside the droplets give radius R (μm) and number of elementary charges N on the
ES droplet; Δt corresponds to the time required for evaporative droplet shrinkage to size where fission occurs. Only the first three successive
fissions of a parent droplet are shown. At the bottom right, the fission of the oﬀspring droplet to produce the charged nanodroplets is shown.
The inset shows a drawing of droplet jet fission based on actual flash microphotograph. (Adapted with permission from [22], Copyright
1993, American Chemical Society).

5.3. Formation of Gas-Phase Analyte Ions from the Charged
Droplets. Two principle mechanisms have been proposed to
account for the formation of gas-phase analyte ions from
very small highly charged ES droplets, and those are charge
residue model (CRM) [16, 68, 69] and ion evaporation model
(IEM) [63].
5.3.1. Charge Residue Model. As a result of a series of solvent evaporation and Coulomb fission, an extremely small
charged droplet (R ≈ 1 nm) is formed which contains only
one analyte molecule [16, 22]. Desolvation of this droplet
causes its charges (on the surface) to land on the analyte

molecules. Since the “residual” droplet charge at the last stage
of the solvent evaporation in the ES process is retained by
the analyte molecule in the gas phase, this mechanism is
called charge residue mechanism/model. Originally this
mechanism was hypothesized by Dole et al. [16] and a more
detail consideration as well as support of this mechanism was
given by Schmelzeisen-Redeker et al. [68].
A Study of Winger and coworkers showed that generally
large macromolecules like proteins follow CRM [70]. They
determined one interesting empirical correlation (see (1))
between the analyte molecular mass (M) and the observed
average charge state (Zav ) in the ESI-mss spectra of the

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

9

100

Number of charges, z

80
60
40
20
0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
m (MD)

1

1.2

1.4

z-mean
z-max
z-Rayleigh

Figure 8: Plot of the average charge state (z) against molecular mass (m) for various proteins that follow CRM. [(•) Observed highest charge
state; (◦) observed lowest charge state; solid curve corresponds to the average charge state predicted by (4)]. The molecular weights of the
proteins given on the x-axis are in units of 106 Da. (Reprinted with permission from Analytica Chimica Acta [61], Copyright 2000, Elsevier).

corresponding analyte (starburst dendrimers) [71]. The “a”
and “b” are constants and b = 0.53 gave the best result
Zav = aM b .

(1)

Later on Fernandez De La Mora [61] showed that the
above equation (1) could be theoretically derived for the
analytes like proteins that follow CRM. He assumed that after
the final Coulomb fission event that produces the ultimate charged water droplet containing one neutral protein
molecule would be a little bit larger in size than that of the
protein. Then the final solvent evaporation would completely
transfer the droplet charges to the protein. He also assumed
that the density of the globular protein is the same as that of
water (ρ = 1 g/c.c) [61, 72], and then he calculated the radius
of the protein as




4 3
πR ρNA = M.
3

(2)

The Rayleigh limit charging (which deals with the Rayleigh
stability limit for coulomb fission of the charged droplet) of
the water droplet having the same radius (R) as of the analyte
protein can be given by the Rayleigh equation (3) [62], and
then combining (2) and (3) he found the (4) [61] which is
similar to (1) empirically obtained by Winger and coworkers.
Notably that the exponent for M equals to 0.5 is very much
close to the exponent 0.53 of the empirical equation (1)



3 1/2

ZR · e = 8π ε0 γR


πγε0
ZR = 4
ρe2 NA

,

(3)

1/2
× M 1/2 = 0.078M 1/2 ,

(4)

where e is the elementary charge, Z is the charge number,
ε0 is the permittivity of the surrounding medium, NA is the

Avogadro’s number, ρ is the density of the water, M is the
molecular weight of the protein, and γ is the surface tension
of the solvent (water). A plot (solid line) shown in Figure 8
is based on the above theoretically derived equation (4), and
that fits well with the empirical data (shown by circles) of
several proteins investigated by Fernandez De La Mora. So
the observed agreement between the charges on the proteins
and the charges on water droplets of the same size, at the
Rayleigh limit, is not a coincidence but a consequence of the
multiply charged proteins being formed by the CRM.
5.3.2. Ion Evaporation Model. After repeated solvent evaporation and Coulomb fission, the radii of the charged droplets
decrease to a given size when the electric field due to the
charges at the surface of the droplet is strong enough to cause
direct emission of the solvated ions [22, 63, 73]. Typically
when the droplet reaches the size R ≤ 10 nm, the ion emission
dominates over Rayleigh fission. Thus unlike CRM, this
mechanism does not require the production of very small
droplets (R ≈ 1 nm) that contains only one analyte molecule.
This mechanism is called ion evaporation mechanism/model
as proposed by Iribarne and Thomson [22, 63, 73]. They proposed that the rate constant k 1 for ion emission from the
highly charged droplet surface can be given by the following
equation (5) where kb is the Boltzmann constant, T is the
temperature of the droplet, h is the Planck constant, and
ΔG † is the free energy of activation:


k1 =



kb T
ΔG†
.
exp −
h
RT

(5)

The activation energy is influenced by several parameters like
(a) attraction between the escaping ion and the solvent by
which the droplet is composed, (b) Coulomb repulsion of the
escaping ion by the remaining charges on the droplet surface,
and (c) ion desolvation energy. Although the above Iribarne
and Thomson equation (5) can successfully interpret the

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

+

+

+

Stage I

+
+

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

Stage II

+

+

+

+

+ +

+

+

+
+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

10

+ +

+ +

+

+

+
+
+

Stage III

Figure 9: Hypothetical picture of a charge droplet containing five analytes of diﬀerent shapes and sizes at three diﬀerent stages of the solvent
evaporation before Coulomb fission.

ion evaporation process, it cannot predict the observed relative intensities of ions in the ESI mass spectra, which is
mostly influenced by the structural and physicochemical
nature of the analyte and the solvent used. However, IEM
is experimentally well supported for small inorganic and
organic ions [53, 61, 74, 75].
5.3.3. Fenn’s Model of Ion Formation: An Extension of IEM.
Unlike IEM, the Fenn’s model [39, 69] states that the analytes
remain neutral inside the neutral core of the charge droplet
(charges lie on the surface). If the analyte is intrinsically
charged (e.g., proteins), this charged neutrality could be
maintained either by a nearby counter anion as its “shadow”
(i.e., ion pair formation) or by a proton transfer process
between analyte and the solvent. The overall neutral analyte
would have a rapid Brownian diﬀusion motion inside the
charged droplet. The successive solvent evaporation and
Coulomb fission would continuously increase the surface
charge density of the droplet. In positive ion mode these
charges are basically protons. Protons are pretty small, and
they can have a strong attractive interaction with the molecules of polar solvents. When a given part of the analyte
encounters the proton-rich surface by Brownian thrashing
(energy on the order of kb T), the basic residues located
at that portion of the analyte would be attached to the
surface protons. Thus the protons would serve to anchor the
analyte molecule nearer to the surface. Thermal activation
(Brownian oscillation, internal vibration, and rotation, with
amplitudes constrained by kb T) may provide the energy for
the analyte to move some distance outside the droplet. This
separation between the protonated analyte residues and the
charges on the droplet surface leads to repulsion, which
facilitate the escape of a remaining portion of the molecule
that carries other charge sites. With increase in the charged
residues (outside the droplet surface) of the escaping analyte,
the Coulomb repulsion increases and that facilitate the
escape of the whole analyte with a varying degree of charging.
The degree of charging varies not only for the size, shape,
orientation, and fugacity or escaping tendency of the analyte
but also for the continuously variable charge spacing and
electric field at the droplet surface during the process of
repeated solvent evaporation and Coulomb fission. Thus, the
number of charges that are attached to the analyte molecule

when it desorbs from the surface is the number of charges
that it can span on the surface during its emission. The
situation is illustrated in Figure 9, which shows three hypothetical snapshots of a charged droplet at diﬀerent stages during its evaporation before undergoing Coulomb fission. The
droplet contains five analytes of diﬀerent shapes and sizes.
The droplet size decreases with solvent evaporation and the
distance between equally spaced positive charges decreases
since the number of charges remains constant. Clearly, at the
evaporation stage III, the desorption of the analytes from the
droplet surface would lead more charging than that at the
stage I. Again at each stage the charging will vary according
to the conformation and size of the analyte. But in practice
the ejection of the charged analyte would continuously lower
the number of charges and number of analyte species in the
host droplet from stage I to stage III. As a result, above and
below some critical charge states, the relative ion abundance
decreases and that is reflected by a bell-shaped distribution
of the ion abundances (see Figure 5). Of course the scenario
is much more complicated because of the involvement of
the Coulomb fission since it also contributes the charge and
analyte concentration in a droplet.

6. Factors That Influence the Charge State
Distribution (CSD) of Proteins
Multiple charging is an intrinsic feature of electrospray ionization of macromolecules like proteins [41–43]. Several factors aﬀect the charge state distributions (CSDs) of proteins
in vacuum generated by ESI [76]. Mostly the physical dimension of the protein molecules in solution are the major determinant of this CSD [76, 77]. As discussed earlier, in positive
ion mode the basic sites in the proteins can accommodate
protons and in the negative ion mode the acidic sites in the
proteins can give up protons (see Figure 10) in the vanishing
charged droplet and thus responsible for the gas-phase ion
formation mostly via CRM [78]. Here we would discuss some
critical factors known to significantly influence the protein
CSD.
6.1. Solution pH. The change of pH of the protein solution
can change the protein conformation (tertiary structure),
and the degree of the conformational change depends on the

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

11

H
H

H
H+

N

H

R1

N

H

R1
In positive-ion mode

HO

O

− OH

O

O

C

C

R2

R2

+H2 O

In negative-ion mode

Figure 10: The proton transfer reaction responsible for protein
charging in gas phase via ESI.

nature of the protein and the acidity/basicity of the solution.
According to the CRM, it is the geometry or size of the
protein that actually determines the average charge state (CS)
of the electrosprayed protein in vacuum [76]. Relatively small
number of charge states (low average CS) is produced when
a natively folded protein is transferred to the gas phase upon
ESI than that when an unfolded/denatured protein undergoes ESI. This is because the native proteins maintain a compact structure by its tightly folded polypeptide chain, and
this compactness is lost upon denaturation. After denaturation, the solvent accessibility as well as the size of the protein
increases, which in turn leads to increase the charge state
distribution over a broad range (m/z) with the high average
CS [45, 48, 76, 79].
Figure 11 shows a typical example of ESI-CSD of cytochrome c at diﬀerent pH in positive ion mode [80]. At pH
6.4, where cyt c is known to adopt native, tightly folded conformation, the positive ion ESI-MS (Figure 11(a)) shows
relatively narrow CSD with +8 as the most intense CS (base
peak). But at pH 2.3, where a substantial unfolding of cyt c
occurs, the positive ion ESI-MS (Figure 11(d)) shows a broad
CSD with +17 as the most intense CS (base peak). Native and
nonnative protein states often coexist at equilibrium under
mildly denaturing conditions. In such conditions, the CSD
becomes bimodal, reflecting the presence of both native and
denatured states. At pH 2.6 cyt c exists in both native and
unfolded states as is evidenced by the bimodal CSD in the
ESI-mass spectrum (Figure 11(c)).
In certain cases proteins, for example, ubiquitin unfolds
in both acidic (pH 2) and basic solution (pH 11.7) and when
the protein was electrosprayed from both acidic and basic
solution, the corresponding positive ion mass spectra showed
characteristic broad CSD with maxima at +11 and +8, respectively, [81]. But the ESI-mass spectrum of ubiquitin in
neutral solution (pH 7.2) [81] showed narrow CSD with
most intense charge at +6.

The native environment of pepsin (in gastric juice) is extremely acidic, and at native pH (pH ≤ 2) it remains in folded
active form. So when it is electrosprayed from the acidic
solution (pH 1.6), it shows remarkably narrow CSD [82],
and the CSD does not change until the solution pH is raised
above 2.5, a threshold pH of pepsin deactivation [77]. The
large scale unfolding of pepsin occurs in neutral and basic
solutions. Therefore, a dramatic change of pepsin CSD in
ESI-mass spectra acquired under these conditions [76, 77] is
observed, and the corresponding most intense CS increased
to above +30.
So the analysis of the CSD of proteins in ESI-MS provides
reliable information on the protein structure and stability at
diﬀerent solution pH.
6.2. Number of Acidic and Basic Functional Groups in the
Proteins. Conformation-dependent neutralization theory
(CDNT) was proposed to interpret the appearance of main
CS in ESI of proteins [83, 84]. The diﬀerence between acidic
(aspartic acid, glutamic acid, etc.) and basic (arginine, lysine,
histidine, etc.) residues in the protein sequence was used
to determine the predominant charge state in the ESI-mass
spectrum. However, the CDNT could not explain the appearance of the positive ion mass spectra of several proteins
although they contain overall negative charge and vice versa.
Later it was proposed that only the surface-exposed basic or
acidic groups of a protein could hold charge in the gas phase
[85]. However, some surface-exposed residues may form salt
bridges, ion pair, or hydrogen bonding within the protein,
reducing the eﬀective charge density on these residues [86]
and thereby decreasing the charge on the protein. Hence,
we reported a more refined model to interpret the CS based
on the three-dimensional structure (crystal structure) of the
protein [78]. In view of this, we have identified the free basic
and acidic groups (which do not form any ion pair or salt
bridge) on the protein surface from the crystal structure
analysis of a series of the proteins. Then we investigated the
ESI-mass spectra of those native folded proteins in both positive and negative ion mode [78]. Interestingly it was observed
that the maximum charge state of the gaseous protein ion
actually corresponds to the number of surface-exposed free
basic (in positive ion mode) or free acidic residues (in negative ion mode). This model was further supported by the ESImass spectra of the denatured proteins [78]. Upon denaturation all the acidic and basic residues become surface exposed,
and the number of the basic and acidic residues in the protein
sequence corresponded to the maximum CS in positive and
negative ion mode, respectively.
Some exceptional examples of the above model were reported later. One particularly interesting example is the ESImass spectra of native folded pepsin (33 kDa) which contains
total 41 acidic and only four basic residues [82]. Despite the
small number of basic sites, the native pepsin (pH ≤ 2) can
accommodate maximum 11 positive charges (most intense
CS is +10) in gas phase upon positive ion ESI [76, 77]. This
maximum charge state (+11) is higher than that predicted
by our model and lower than that predicted by CRM ((4),
which predicts +14 as the average CS). Since most proteins
possess a high number of basic sites, the requisite number of

12

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

750

1000

1250
m/z

1500

ESI MS intensity (a.u.)

8+

ESI MS intensity (a.u.)

500

9+

pH 4.2

pH 6.4

1750

2000

500

750

1000

(a)

1250
m/z

1500

1750

(b)

17+

17+
ESI MS intensity (a.u.)

ESI MS intensity (a.u.)

9+

pH 2.6
500

750

2000

1000

1250
m/z

1500

1750

pH 2.3
2000

(c)

500

750

1000

1250
m/z

1500

1750

2000

(d)

Figure 11: ESI-mass spectra of cyt c in water containing 3% methanol and 0.5 mM ammonium acetate at (a) pH 6.4, (b) pH 4.2, (c) pH 2.6,
and (d) pH 2.3. The pH was adjusted by the addition of hydrochloric acid. (Reprinted with permission from Biochemistry [80], Copyright
1997, American Chemical Society).

positive charges as predicted by CRM can almost always be
distributed among the available free basic sites on the surface
of the native proteins. But, the ability of gaseous pepsin to
accommodate a number of protons far exceeding the number
of available basic sites might be due to the participation of
the other mild basic functional groups (e.g., amide moiety,
etc.) or collectively a number of polar functional groups
over the large flexible surface of the protein to hold (solvate)
protons in gas phase [87]. The lack of the required number of
strong basic functional groups in pepsin possibly inhibits the
extensive protonation as predicted by CRM. Moreover, it has
been proposed that the proton aﬃnity of the solvent molecules provides a “cut-oﬀ ” level for the amino acid residues
that are protonated in gas phase by ESI [87].
6.3. Protein Surface Area in Solution. Despite the fact that the
extent of multiple charging in ESI is influenced by the number of surface-exposed free acidic/basic functional groups in
the proteins (i.e., the gas-phase ion chemistry), the physical
dimension or the structural integrity of the protein also
largely influence the CSD. Kaltashov and Mohimen [77]
demonstrated that the CSD of protein ions in ESI can be correlated to the solvent-exposed surface area in solution. In
their study on 22 proteins ranging from the small protein
insulin (5 kDa) to the large protein ferritin (500 kDa), they

showed that the observed average charge states (Zav ) in the
ESI-mass spectra could be correlated more precisely to the
solvent exposed surface area rather than the radius or molecular weight of the proteins as suggested by CRM ((3) and
(4)). The spherical approximation of the proteins which was
used by Fernandez De La Mora [61] could provide erroneous
results in CRM ((3) and (4)) since in practice the protein
shape can deviate from spherical. Therefore, they extended
(3) to (6) as given below to correlate the Zav with the protein
surface area S (Since, S = 4πR2 ) [77].


Zav · e = 4 4πε02 γ2 S3

1/4

.

(6)

Their empirical data is shown in Figure 12, which clearly
indicates that the surface area (S) evaluated from the known
crystal structure and the charge state Zav , obtained from the
ESI-mass spectra of the proteins, are correlated and fitted
well by (7) or (8) with the value a = 0.69. The fit of the
data points (Figure 12) is much better than the fit in the
Fernandez De La Mora plot (Figure 8)
Zav = ASa ,
ln Zav = ln A + a ln S.

(7)

Thus, they showed that the average CS-molecular mass correlation holds only for the tightly packed globular protein.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

13
100

In (average charge)

4

40

75

20
10
0

3

+6

30

0

Intensity

Average charge

50

30
60
90 120
Surface area (103, A2 )

50

25

+5

2
+7
1200
1
8

9

10
In (surface area, A2 )

11

12

Figure 12: Correlation between the average charge state of protein
ions generated by ESI under near-native conditions (10 mM ammonium acetate, pH adjusted to 7) and their surface areas in solution,
whose calculation was based upon their crystal structures. The data
are plotted in the logarithmic scale (a graph plotted in the normal
scale is shown in the inset). A gray-shaded dot represents a pepsin
data point. An open circle underneath represents the highest charge
of pepsin if the extent of multiple charging was limited by the
number of basic residues within the protein molecule. (Reprinted
with permission from Analytical Chemistry [77], Copyright 2005,
American Chemical Society).

But, there are some proteins (e.g., ferritin) that are not tightly
packed in their native conformations and it is actually the
solvent exposed surface area of the proteins that is the major
determinant of the average CS of the gaseous proteins produced by ESI process [77].
6.4. Presence of Nonvolatile Salts in Protein Solution. It is
often the case that the proteins are purified and stored in
some buﬀer solution containing nonvolatile salts (e.g., sodium chloride, potassium chloride, sodium phosphate, potassium phosphate, etc.). So if the protein solution is not
properly desalted before injecting it in the ESI probe, the ions
such as Na+ , K+ , and so forth, make strong ion pairing with
the ionized acidic residues of the protein in the gas phase
[88]. The nonvolatile metal ion impurities not only form
strong bonds with carboxylate functional groups but also
with other polar functional groups including the amide
groups in the peptide backbone [89, 90]. This ion pairing
would be driven by large loss of the solvent from the droplet
and thus concentrating the nonvolatile salt component along
with the proteins in the vanishing charged droplet. The
binding of those metal ions (Na+ and K+ ) with the protein in
the gas phase is so strong that they even survive in the cleanup stages (heated capillary, nozzle-skimmer dissociation
potential) of the ESI mass spectrometer [91]. But the adduct
formation of the metal ions (M+ ) and/or their salts (MA)
with the proteins is highly undesirable because of the mass
shifting in variable extent that generates multiple peaks corresponding to each charge state (see Figure 13) [91]. The
observed multiple peaks corresponding to each charge state

1375

1550
m/z

1725

1900

Figure 13: Nano-ESI-mass spectrum of 25 μM ubiquitin in 1 mM
NaCl solution. The spectrum was obtained at low nozzle-skimmer
potential, so that there was little collisional activation of the protein.
It is obvious that each charge state is not a single peak but consists
of multiple peaks due to the adduct formation of the salt ions
(e.g., Na+ & Cl− ) with ubiquitin. (Reprinted with permission
from Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry [91],
Copyright 2005, Elsevier).

can be rationalized by (a) replacement of H+ with M+ and (b)
ion pairing of M+ with the ionized acidic residues (aspartic
acid/glutamic acid/C-terminal carboxylic acid, etc.) and/or
ion pairing of A− (counter anion of the non volatile salt)
with the ionized basic residues (Arginine, Lysine, Histidine,
N-terminal amine, etc.) [91]. If the mass spectrometer is
not of suﬃciently high resolution, then a complicated and
“messy” spectrum is produced for the adduct formation of
the component ions of the salt impurities with the protein in
the gas phase.
In our recent study we have showen that the relative
volatility of the charged particles (from salts) and the surface
accessibility of the polar residues of the protein towards the
charged particles are important factors in the CSD of the
protein in gas phase [92]. The surface accessibility of surfaceexposed free basic residues (SEFBRs) and surface-exposed
free acidic residues (SEFARs) were determined from the crystal structure and compared with the most probable chargestate (most-intense peak obtained in the positive ion and
the negative ion mode ESI-MS spectra of the proteins). The
results indicated that the number of the SEFBRs that have
surface accessibility above the mean surface accessibility of
all the SEFBRs in the protein corresponds to the most-intense
charge state of the protein in the positive ion mode. Analogously, the number of the SEFARs that have surface accessibility above the mean surface accessibility of all SEFARs in
the protein would give the most-intense negative ion charge
state of the protein. Hence, the most-intense charge states
both in the positive ion as well as in the negative ion modes
for a large number of proteins could be predicted based on
this simple model from surface accessibility of the protein.
6.5. Use of Ammonium Acetate Salt Additive. Ammonium
acetate buﬀer solution is very often used in the mass spectrometric analysis of proteins (see Figure 11) since unlike

14

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

other buﬀer of nonvolatile salts it produces very clean mass
spectra solely due to the protonated proteins in the gas phase
[88, 91]. Even the use of ammonium acetate prevents the
formation of sodium/potassium (if present as impurities)
adduct with the gaseous protein. When ammonium acetate is
added to the protein solution, following ion pairing reaction
(8) occurs on the solvent accessed surface of the protein [91].
Ammonium cations pair with acidic functional groups, and
acetate anions pair with basic functional groups in the protein in the gas phase upon ESI. The larger concentration of
ammonium acetate relative to sodium/potassium ion impurities reduces the possibility of ion pairing involving sodium/
potassium because of the predominance of ammonium acetate interaction with proteins (8). When the resulting protein
ions containing the ion pairs (8) fly through the heated capillary and nozzle skimmer in the intermediate pressure region
of the ESI interface, they encounter collision with the background gas and solvent vapor, which causes loss of volatile
acetic acid and ammonia by the proton transfer reaction (9).
The process is entropically favorable, and the dissociation
is also facile because of the low bond (proton transfer)
energy for the dissociation (15 kcal/mol for acetic acid and
11 kcal/mol for ammonia) [91]. The net eﬀect of the complete process is nothing but the proton transfer from the
protonated basic residues to deprotonated acidic residues.
Though the positive and negative groups are neutralized, the
molecular weight of the protein does not change. Thus, a
clean mass spectrum of the protein is obtained without the
mass change
+

H3 N -(protein)-COO− + CH3 COONH4
= CH3 COO− + H3 N -(protein)-COO− NH+4 ,

CH3 COO− + H3 N -(protein)-COO− NH+4
= CH3 COOH +H2 N-(protein)-COOH +NH3 .

(8)

(9)

Felitsyn et al. [93] and Peschke et al. [94] also suggested that,
in presence of the volatile salt like ammonium acetate, the
ammonium cations can also bind to the basic residues of
the protein, and there is proton transfer reaction from the
ammonium ion to the basic residues of the protein with formation of volatile ammonia (base) and the protonated protein in the gas phase. Thus, ammonium acetate can also
enhance the propensity of protonation of the protein in the
gas phase.
The above equations ((8) and (9)) suggest that the use of
ammonium acetate not only suppresses the metal ion adduct
formation but also prevents the adduct formation involving
the anion of strong acids (e.g., phosphate, trifluoroacetate
anions, etc.) and ionized basic residues. Though (trifluoroacetic acid) TFA is frequently used in the mobile phase of
the liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS), the
presence of the TFA anion in the eﬄuent causes the loss of
sensitivity, and the use of ammonium acetate prevents that
sensitivity loss [95].
6.6. The Nature of Solvent. Several physical properties of
the solvent like polarity (dielectric constant) [96], gas-phase

basicity [97–99], and the surface tension [61, 100, 101] are
also known to be responsible for the CSD of the protein. It
is expected that the solvent with higher dielectric constants
will tolerate high charge densities in the evaporating droplets
produced by the electrospray process. The excess charges can
also be confined to a thin layer at the surface because of
the increased conductivity of the polar solvent with higher
dielectric constant. At the last stage of solvent evaporation or
gaseous ion emission from the charged droplet, high polarity
solvents are more eﬀective in stabilizing the multiply charged
species, whereas the low polarity solvent may disfavor that.
So the solvent with higher dielectric constant would boost
higher charge states in the gaseous analyte ions generated
from those ES solvent droplets. Loo et al. also showed that
the denaturing capacities of diﬀerent solvents also aﬀect the
protein CSD, which in turn reflect the conformation (solvent
accessibility) of the protein in that solution [102].
Apart from the apparent gas-phase basicities (calculated
based on the intrinsic gas-phase basicities and Coulomb
energy of the interacting charges) of the basic sites in the protein, the gas-phase basicity of the solvent is also an important
factor to significantly aﬀect the CSD of the protein [87, 103].
The eﬀect of the solvent composition on both maximum CS
and the CSD of the proteins were investigated by Iavarone
and coworkers [96]. They showed that CSD of cytochrome c
and myoglobin (see Figure 14), formed from 47%/50%/3%
water/solvent/acetic acid solutions, shifts to lower charge
(higher m/z) when the 50% solvent fraction is changed from
water to methanol, to acetonitrile, to isopropanol. This is also
the order of increasing gas-phase basicities of these solvents.
However, the eﬀect is relatively small for these solvents,
possibly due to their limited concentration (in gas phase)
inside the electrospray interface. But the addition of small
amounts of diethylamine (0.4%) in the aspirating solution
results in dramatic shifts to lower charge, presumably due
to preferential proton transfer from the higher charge state
ions to diethylamine. These results clearly show that the
maximum charge states and charge state distributions of ions
formed by electrospray ionization are influenced by solvents
that are more volatile than water and the gas-phase basicity
of the solvent too [96].
It is also not surprising that along with diﬀerent physical
properties of the solvent the surface tension plays an important role to the CSD of the protein, since the surface tension
parameter (γ) is involved in the Rayleigh equation (3) [62],
based on which the CRM is proposed [61]. The increase in
surface tension of the solvent should increase the average
charge state of the analyte. Iavarone and Williams showed
that, in absence of other factors, the surface tension of the
ultimate electrospray droplet (formed after repeated solvent
evaporation and Coulomb fission), from which the charged
gaseous analyte is formed, is a significant factor in determining the overall analyte charge [100].
6.7. The Supercharging Eﬀect. Iavarone and coworkers reported interesting additives, for example, m-nitrobenzyl alcohol
(m-NBA) and glycerol to the aqueous solution of the protein
and peptide, which can dramatically increase both the maximum charge state and the most intense charge state

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
23+

17+

21+
19+
17+
Normalized
abundance

Normalized
abundance

25+

15

15+
27+

600

800

1000
m/z

15+
19+

1200

13+

21+

11+

(a)

600
19+

23+
Heme
25+
27+

1000

1200

m/z
15+

(a)

19+

600

800

1000
m/z

1200

(b)

21+
Normalized
abundance

800

17+

17+

23+

21+
15+
13+

19+
17+

23+

Heme

Normalized
abundance

Normalized
abundance

21+

600

15+

800

1000

1200

1000

1200

m/z

27+ 25+
(b)

19+
800

1000
m/z

1200

(c)

Normalized
abundance

21+
Heme
27+

19+
17+

23+

21+
Normalized
abundance

600

15+

17+

23+
24+

15+

25+
600

800
m/z

600

800

1000
m/z

1200

(d)

Figure 14: Myoglobin (10−5 M) electrosprayed from 47%/50%/3%
water/solvent/acetic acid solutions, where the “solvent” was (a)
water, (b) methanol, (c) acetonitrile, or (d) isopropanol. (Reprinted
with permission from Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry [96], Copyright 2000, Elsevier).

[101]. They termed this phenomenon “supercharging eﬀect.”
Figure 15 shows that the addition of just <1% m-NBA to the
electrospray solution, the maximum charge state as well as
average charge state increases significantly [101]. Similarly
the addition of small amount of m-NBA in the peptide
(KKKK) solution substantially increased the most intense
and average CS [101]. The exact mechanism of this enhanced
charging is still not clear. Recently they have suggested that
these supercharging reagents have low vapor pressures (less
volatile), and aqueous droplets are preferentially enriched
in these reagents as evaporation occurs [100]. Less evaporative cooling will occur after the droplets are substantially

(c)

Figure 15: Electrospray ionization mass spectra of cytochrome c
(10−5 M) from solutions containing (a) 0, (b) 0.3, and (c) 0.7% mNBA. The base solution is 47/50/3% water/methanol/acetic acid.
(Reprinted with permission from Analytical Chemistry [101], Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society).

enriched in the low volatility supercharging reagent, and the
droplet temperature should be higher compared with when
these reagents are not present. Protein unfolding induced
by chemical and/or thermal denaturation in the final electrospray droplet, from which the charged gaseous protein is
produced, appears to be the primary origin of the enhanced
charging [104, 105]. The fact is further supported by the
arrival time distributions obtained from traveling wave ion
mobility spectrometry [105], which showed that the higher
charge state ions that are formed with the supercharging reagents are significantly more unfolded than lower charge state
ions. Though this model successfully explained the supercharging of proteins and their noncovalent complexes, it fails

16
to explain the supercharging of small molecules like small
peptides [101], which do not have any tertiary structure. A
detail investigation of the physical parameters of the evaporating and disintegrating droplet containing this supercharging reagent is required in the future to understand the exact
mechanism of supercharging.
Recently Lomeli group has reported other supercharging
agents, for example, benzyl alcohol, m-nitroacetophenone,
m-nitrobenzonitrile, o-NBA, m-NBA, p-NBA, m-nitrophenyl ethanol, sulfolane (tetramethylene sulfone), and m-(trifluoromethyl)-benzyl alcohol [106]. Among these sulfolane displayed a greater charge increase (61%) than m-NBA
(21%) for myoglobin in aqueous solutions based on average
charge state. All these reagents that promote higher ESI
charging appear to have low solution-phase basicities and
relatively low gas-phase basicities and are less volatile than
water [106].
Thus the increased multiple charging by the supercharging reagents promises its implication in the accurate mass
measurement of the large macromolecules and the structural
characterization of the proteins by tandem mass spectrometry and MSn experiments, where the multiple charging is
important for eﬃcient fragmentation (discussed later) [107–
110].
6.8. Modification of the Protein Charge State Distribution.
Several approaches like acid/alcohol-induced proteins denaturation [102], protein disulphide bond reduction using chemical reducing agent dithiothreitol, and so forth, [50] were
undertaken to modify the protein CSD in last two decades.
When the disulfide bonds are reduced, much higher charge
states can be obtained because the reduction of the disulfide
bonds allows the protein to unfold further and expose additional acidic/basic sites for protonation/deprotonation [50].
Though the protein CSD can be altered by manipulating
the solution conditions (pH, reduction of disulphide bonds,
use of diﬀerent solvents, denaturing agent and supercharging
agent, etc.), it can also lead to deleterious eﬀects such as poor
ESI response, dissociation of noncovalent complexes, and
so forth. But, sometimes it is desirable to alter CSDs independent of initial solution conditions. The CS alteration by
gas-phase proton transfer reaction (post-ESI process) has
been demonstrated via ion/ion [111, 112] or ion/molecule
[113] reaction. But that resulted in significant reduction of
the absolute charge of the gaseous analytes. Recently Kharlamova and coworkers have established a method for the
manipulation of the CSD of the electrosprayed proteins by
exposing the nano ES droplets to the volatile acid/base vapors
in the atmospheric pressure region of the mass spectrometer
[114, 115]. Exposure of the positive ES droplets to the acid
vapors [115] and the negative ES droplets to the base vapors
[114] increases the propensity of high CS formation of the
analyte (protein). On the basis of changes in protein CSDs,
protein folding and unfolding phenomena are implicated
in their studies. Since no change in the CS distributions of
buﬀered proteins exposed to reagent acid/base vapors was
observed, the charge state changes are attributed largely
to a pH eﬀect. They suggested that, when the acid/base
vapor interacts with the nanoelectrospray generated protein

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
droplets, it changes the pH of the droplets and thereby aﬀects
the structure of the protein present in the ES droplets during
the very short nanodroplet lifetime (few tens of microseconds). This change of the protein structure is attributed
by the change of the CSD. They also showed that the species
bound by relatively weak interactions can be preserved, at
least to some extent, allowing for the observation of high
charge states of protein-ligand complexes [114, 115].
Recently Krusemark et al. used chemical derivatization
method to control the CSD, which eventually gave the answer
about the role of protein functional groups in the CSD [116].
When the free carboxylic acid function groups of the denatured proteins were modified by amidation (neutral functional group), minimal change in the CSD in positive ion
mode was observed compared to the unmodified proteins,
indicating that the carboxylic acid functional groups do not
play significant role in charging in the positive ion mode. The
modification of proteins with additional basic sites or fixed
positive charges generated substantially higher charge states
in positive ion mode, providing evidence that the number of
ionizable (basic) sites determines ESI charging for denatured
proteins irrespective of their shape and sizes. Combining
this chemical modification and the ion/molecule or ion/ion
reactions in gas phase, the authors also illustrated some
unique approaches to alter/control the CSD [117].
6.9. Analyte Concentration and the Presence of Electrolyte
Impurities. Apart from the analyte structure and conformation, the analyte concentration in the initial spray solution is
also an important factor that significantly aﬀects the ESI-MS
signal intensity [22, 39, 118]. For multiply charged analyte,
ions of discrete charge state exhibit a linear response of the
ion signal with the analyte concentration in solution until a
certain concentration limit is exceeded. This concentration
limit is dependent on the nature of the analyte. Beyond that
concentration the signal intensity loses that linear response
and may even decrease at extremely high concentration. This
departure from the linearity as the aspirating solution concentration increases can be attributed to the analyte concentration having reached its saturation value during the droplet evaporation so that further loss of solvent results in precipitation, rather than any further increase in its concentration in solution [39]. At elevated concentration the relative
abundances of the gaseous analyte ions of higher charge state
also decrease due to the increase in competition between the
analyte molecules inside the ES droplet for the limited number of available charges on the droplet surfaces [119].
The presence of any ionic species (i.e., electrolytes) other
than analyte in the solution (except for small amounts of
electrospray friendly acids, bases, or buﬀers as discussed
before) is usually avoided when possible, because their presence in the ES solution has been found to suppress the formation of gas-phase ions of the analyte of interest [118, 120–
122].
6.10. Instrumental Parameters. Very often it is observed that
the CSD in the ESI-mass spectra of a particular analyte
acquired from diﬀerent instruments is significantly diﬀerent
though a specific protocol for the sample preparation has

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
been followed. Moreover, ES-mass spectra acquired from the
same instrument at diﬀerent points in time can show some
degree of variability. This is because there are several instrumental parameters which are responsible for the ion production, filtration, and detection. The instrumental parameters
like spray tip orifice diameter (e.g., microspray and nanospray [32, 123]), ion spray voltage (diﬀerent onset voltages
for diﬀerent solvents [22]), source geometry [98, 124] (e.g.,
on-axis, oﬀ-axis, etc., [125]), source gas pressure [39, 126],
source temperature [58], heated capillary temperature (thermal dissociation may occur here) [58, 126–128], sheath/
auxiliary gas flow rate [39] that (aﬀects the evaporation and
cooling rate of the ES droplets), nozzle-skimmer voltage
(declustering potential) [129–132], diﬀerent ion-optics voltages [34, 58] (that guide the ion filtration and trapping)
[34, 58] and nature of the detectors (detector response) [34,
58] are all known to influence the ESI-MS response of the
analyte.

7. Is Substantial Conformational Change of
the Protein Possible inside the ES Droplet?
There are still several aspects of ESI not fully understood
though it is almost two and half decades elapsed after the
discovery of ESI-MS. One such major issue is the conformational and other subtle chemical properties of the analyte
during the transfer from solution to gas phase. The issue
becomes further complicated due to the complexity of the
processes aﬀecting the ES droplets including the charge separation [22], solvent electrolysis at the emitter tip [133, 134],
droplet evaporation then subdivision [22] the increase of
the droplet acidity/basicity, and so forth. As discussed earlier
the droplets produced at low flow rate (typically ∼5 μL/min)
have a narrow distribution of sizes with a most abundant
radius ∼1.5 μm [22]. Such an electrospray droplet was earlier
shown to have a charge of ∼10−14 C, which corresponds to
∼60,000 singly charged ions [16]. If we assume that all these
singly charged ions are protons (in positive ion mode) and
they are homogeneously distributed in the droplet, then the
estimated pH of the initially produced droplet would be
∼5.2. The repeated solvent evaporation and Coulomb fission
of the droplets would increase the proton density and thereby
continuously lower the pH of the droplets. According to the
IEM, the gas-phase ions are supposed to be formed when the
droplet reaches the radius ≤10 nm [63]. The Rayleigh charging [62] at this limit (r = 10 nm) corresponds to 125 elementary charges (protons) in the droplet. So the corresponding pH of the droplet at this limit is ∼1.3. The acidity of the
ES droplets was also experimentally measured [135]. Overall
the chemical composition in the final small droplets from
which the naked analyte ions are formed may be significantly
diﬀerent from that of the original sample solution [22].
For example, the acid/base equilibrium, the conformational
states, and/or noncovalent bonding in the analyte may all be
aﬀected by the subtle changes in the composition and properties of the droplets during the electrospray. There have
been no reports addressing the possible eﬀects of the microenvironment of the solvent droplets on the analyte during
the ES process. Generally it has been assumed that the solute

17
molecules residing at the neutral core of the charged droplet
remain “oblivious” to the harsh conditions on the droplet
surface and the environment beyond it until the last of the
solvent molecules is gone. As a consequence it is presumed
that the protein charge state distribution in the gas phase
actually represents the protein conformation in the initial
solution. In some reports it has been also assumed that
the violent nature of charged jet breakup and subsequent
Coulombic explosion of the ES droplets encapsulating the
proteins can cause repacking of the supramolecular assemblies, forcing them to hold a minimal volume [77, 136]. But
no direct experimental evidence is still available to support
this assumption on the molecular rearrangement inside the
charged ES droplets. So the molecular behavior inside the
charged ES droplets still remains like a “black box” and the
exact processes that happen to a molecule residing inside the
charged droplets are far from being understood.
If the physical and chemical properties of the ES droplet
continuously change during the lifetime of the droplet then
what happens to the conformation of the proteins residing
inside the charged droplet? Does a protein change its tertiary
structure or conformation inside the violently behaved
(charged jet breakup) charged ES droplet? The preservation
of the overall protein integrity via ES process does not necessarily mean the retention of the initial solution structure
intact inside the charged droplets. Some recent works [137,
138] suggested that after the ES process the new gaseous environment can ultimately cause dramatic structural alteration
of the protein (post-ESI process) and the existence of gaseous
macromolecules (proteins) with a number of diﬀerent conformations [138]. Though in the solvent-free environment
the protein conformational change is not surprising, but the
issue regarding the conformational change inside the ES
droplet relative to the initial solvent is still far from being
understood. If the protein molecule is susceptible to change
their three-dimensional conformation inside the ES droplet,
then the CSD in the corresponding ESI-mass spectrum
should obviously reflect the three-dimensional structure of
the protein inside the droplet not in the initial solution.
In view of this we have recently conducted some experiments [139] on some model analytes (small molecules) that
are labile to be transformed inside the charge droplet. It is
often argued that the charges on an ES droplet are distributed
over its surface with equidistant spacing and that they are
locked into this pattern by the forces of Coulomb repulsion
[39], and the bulk or core of the ES droplet essentially
remains free of charge to minimize the potential energy of
the droplet [140]. But when we put a highly stable intrinsically charged molecule inside the charged ES droplets, we
observed a drastic transformation of their structure due to
huge Coulomb force of repulsion on the positively charged
analyte imparted by the surface protons of the ES droplet
(see Scheme 1). This result unambiguously suggests that the
violent nature of the charged ES droplets can aﬀect the analyte residing inside it depending on the nature of the analyte
[139].
Recently we have also induced the protein conformational change inside the charge droplet by perturbing the
droplet solvent composition during the lifetime of the

18

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
CH3
N
H

H

N

N

−2H+

Ni
H

N

N

CH3
N

2+

H

N

N

H
−

Ni
H N

N

N
H

CH2 H
N
N
Ni
N
N

N
CH3

N
CH3

N
CH3

1

A

B

−

N

CH2 H
N
N
Ni
N N
H
CH2

C

Scheme 1: The fragmentation pathway of the cationic complex 1 inside the charged droplet.

droplet (unpublished work). But it is not clear to us whether
without perturbing the solvent composition of the charge
droplet the protein conformational change is possible or not
in the natural way of ES process.

8. Tandem Mass Spectrometry:
Collision-Induced Dissociation
The word “tandem” means arrangement of two or more
objects/persons one behind another, [141]. Similarly tandem
mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is a method where the gaseous
ions are subjected to two or more sequential stages of mass
analysis (which may be separated spatially or temporally)
according to quotient mass/charge [40, 142]. For example, in
a tandem mass spectrometric experiment, a precursor ion is
mass selected by a mass analyzer Q1 (see Figure 4(b)) and
then focused into a reaction cell q2 (collision cell) where it
undergoes a gas-phase chemical reaction. The reaction gives
diﬀerent product ions with diﬀerent masses, which are then
passed to another mass analyzer Q3 (see Figure 4(b)). This
last mass analyzer scans the masses of the product ions and
generates the product ion spectrum. The mass analyzers are
set up in series either in space (sector, triple quadrupole, and
hybrid instruments) or in time (trapping instruments).
ESI transforms the analyte in gas phase without rupturing any covalent bonds and provides the information about
the molecular weight (MW). This MW alone can not determine the structure of an unknown analyte. So, the fragmentation of the gaseous analyte is deliberately required for the
structural elucidation. The fragment ion spectrum is basically the fingerprint of the presence of a particular analyte
(precursor ion). By investigating the fragmentation reaction
(fragment-ion spectrum), one can actually determine the
correct chemical structure of the unknown analyte sample.
The task is like a jigsaw puzzle, where the players have been
given a broken plate and asked to join them together in a sensible way to find the actual shape of the plate. Now the
question is how one can fragment a charged molecule in gas
phase? The mass-selected ion (precursor analyte) is activated
in the collision cell (e.g., q2 in Figure 4(b)) by increasing its internal energy. This activation causes the homolytic or heterolytic cleavage of the chemical bonds. As a
result diﬀerent fragment ions (product ions) are produced.
There are diﬀerent methods of precursor ion activation,
which include collisional activation (collision-induced dissociation or CID [143], surface-induced dissociation or SID

[144, 145], etc.), photon-induced activation (infrared multiphoton dissociation or IRMPD [146], blackbody infrared
radiative dissociation or BIRD [147, 148], ultraviolet photodissociation or UVPD [149, 150], etc.) and electron-mediated activation (electron capture dissociation or ECD [151],
electron transfer dissociation or ETD [152], electron detachment dissociation or EDD [153], electron-induced dissociation or EID [154]), and so forth. Here we would discuss
about the most popular and most common ion activation
method in the ESI-MS system, which is collision-induced
dissociation (CID).
In collision-induced dissociation, the gaseous precursor
ion is allowed to collide with a gaseous target in the collision
cell. The gaseous target is inert and neutral, generally inert
gases such as nitrogen, helium, or argon [155]. As a result of
collision, the energy is gained and redistributed among
diﬀerent vibrational degrees of freedom (internal energy)
within the precursor ion. Thus, an unstable excited state of
the precursor ion is populated, which causes the precursor
ion to decompose into the product ions in a process termed
“collision-induced dissociation” (CID) [143]. So the CID is
basically a unimolecular fragmentation reaction of the massselected precursor ion.
8.1. Multistage CID/Tandem Mass Spectrometry. But it is
often the case that the single-stage collision-induced dissociation provides a lot of confusing fragmentation information
or does not provide enough information for the structural
elucidation. In both of these cases multistage tandem mass
spectrometry (MSn )/multistage CID is performed. Generally
MSn experiments are performed in ion-trap or in FT-ICR
instrument, where each MS step is separated in time [58].
Those trapping instruments allow the refragmentation of the
product ions and thus produce next generation of product
ions and so on. For example, in the first stage, the normal
ESI-mass spectrum (MS1 ) is produced without fragmentation. Then one precursor ion is isolated in the trap and fragmented to produce the first generation product/fragment
ions, and the corresponding spectrum is called MS/MS or
MS2 spectrum. Again one precursor is isolated from the first
generation fragment ion (from MS2 spectrum) and then
fragmented to produce the second generation product ions,
which are scanned to record the MS3 spectrum (MS/MS/
MS). Thus process of isolation and fragmentation can be
repeated a number of times, resulting in a series of MSn
spectra where “n” represents the number of times, that is,

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

19

(n − 1) times, the isolation-fragmentation cycle has been
carried out.
8.2. High- and Low-Energy CID. The appearance of the CID
spectrum is dependent on several parameters like nature of
the projectile ion and target gas, target gas number density,
ion activation time, nature of the collision cell, and above all
on the collision energy between gaseous projectile ion and
the target atom/molecule [58]. This collision is controlled by
the kinetic/translational energy of the projectile. The fraction
of the kinetic energy that can be converted to the internal
energy of the precursor ion in a collision is determined by
the centre of mass collision energy (Ecm ) [143]
Ecm =

m
EK ,
m+M

(10)

where “m” is the atomic/molecular weight of the target gas
“M” is the molecular weight of the precursor ion, and “EK ”
is the precursor ion kinetic energy. Ecm is the maximum
amount of the precursor ion’s kinetic energy, which can be
converted into the internal energy for fragmentation. The
Ecm above 25 eV is defined as high collision energy and that
below 20 eV as low collision energy [58, 158, 159]. Since
a very high kinetic energy (KeV) is gained by the projectile ion in the traditional sector instruments, the high energy
CID spectrum is produced in those instruments [58]. But
the projectile translational energy is in the range tens to
hundreds of electronvolts in the triple-quadrupole instruments and thus those instruments provide low energy CID
spectrum [58]. In the ion-trapping instruments (e.g., QIT),
the ions are trapped within a three-dimensional electric field
inside the ion trap, and a stable ion trajectory is guided by
Mathieu equation. So in QIT the precursor ion kinetic energy
can only be raised to a level where stable ion motion still
occurs. Consequently the achievable kinetic energy of the
precursor ion falls in the range of low energy CID regime
[58].
In low energy CID, the internal energy increase is suﬃcient to vibrationally (not electronically) excite the precursor
ion, which results in the cleavage of the most labile bonds
when a certain threshold energy is reached. But in high
energy CID, electronic excitation of the precursor ion
becomes possible if the ion-neutral interaction time is very
short (<10−14 s). But this generally does not occur for medium-to-large size molecules undergoing high-energy CID
[58]. In those cases a curve-crossing mechanism more likely
occurs [58]. For example, a crossover from the first electronically excited state to the higher vibrational level of the
ground state occurs. But both direct electronic excitation and
curve-crossing are likely to result, a diﬀerent fragmentation
pattern compared to that in the low-energy CID. Although
the high-energy CID spectrum is typically much more complex than low-energy spectrum, it contains maximum structural information. For example, generally backbone cleavage
of the peptide is observed upon low-energy CID but sidechain cleavage including, backbone cleavage of the peptide
is observed upon high-energy CID [159–161]. High-energy
CID is known to promote charge-remote fragmentation

[162, 163], while low-energy CID is often guided by chargedirected fragmentation mechanism (see later) [161].
Here we would discuss the low- and/or high-energy
fragmentation of some biologically important molecules
like peptides, oligosaccharides, oligonucleotides, and lipids,
which are very often analyzed by ESI-CID-MS/MS experiments.
8.3. CID of Peptides. When a peptide is electrosprayed in
positive ion mode, gaseous protonated peptide is produced.
The protons are mostly localized on the most basic sites (e.g.,
Arg, Lys, and his side-chain or N-terminal α-NH2 group) in
the peptides prior to activation [164, 165]. Upon collisional
activation, the ionizing protons are transferred from the
unreactive sites of higher gas-phase basicity (e.g., Arg, Lys,
and his side-chain or N-terminal α-NH2 group) to several
backbone amides to form energetically less favored but reactive backbone-amide-protonated species [161]. The amount
of activation energy that has to supply to the precursorprotonated peptide to make the proton suﬃciently mobile is
dependent on the gas-phase proton aﬃnities of the diﬀerent
amino acids (Arg > Lys > His > Try > Glu > Pro > Gln > Met
> Tyr > Asn > Phe > Thr > Ile > Leu > Val > Asp > Ser >
Ala > Cys > Gly) [166, 167] present in the sequence. For
example, when a doubly protonated peptide, which contains
a strongly basic amino acid residue (e.g., Arg/Lys/His), is
collisionally activated one proton would mostly be anchored
on the basic residue, and the second one would be mobile in
the backbone leading to the heterogeneous population of the
ions varying the location of the second proton. This fast proton “dancing”/migration process to various backbone amide
bonds is called “mobile proton model” as proposed by
Wysocki (see Figure 16) [156, 168, 169]. This mobile proton
model has been verified by hydrogen/deuterium scrambling
studies [170] and theoretically also [171, 172]. Since amide
nitrogen protonation removes the resonance stabilization of
the amide bond, the protonated amide bonds become weak
and labile to fragment in low-energy CID. As a result of heterogeneous population of the activated precursor ions, a series
of peptide bonds are cleaved [161, 173]. Apart from the
amide bond fragmentation, other backbone bond fragmentation is also possible via mobile proton model. A notation
has been developed to indicate the peptide fragments that
arise from the CID of the protonated peptides. The N-terminal fragment ions (charge is retained on the N-terminus) are
indicated by an , bn , and cn , and C-terminal fragment ions
(charge is retained on the C-terminus) are indicated by
xn , yn , and zn [174, 175] (see Figure 17). The subscript “n”
indicates the number of amino acid residues in the fragment.
As shown in Figure 17, the N-terminal an , bn , and cn ions
are complimentary to the C-terminal x(n−m) , y(n−m) , and
z(n−m) ions, respectively, where “m” is the total number of
constituent amino acids in the precursor peptide. Under lowenergy collision condition, the peptide dissociation mainly
leads to the formation of N-terminal a, b-fragments, and
C-terminal y-fragment [58, 161]. As a qualitative basis, the
fragment with higher gas-phase basicity (GB) will remain
protonated with higher probability than the fragment with
lower GB [161]. New fragment can further be created, under

20

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
+
H3 N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
+
H3N

O

O
CH

C

NH

CH

R1

C

NH

CH

C

OH

O

R2

Figure 16: Mobile proton model. (Reprinted with permission from Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry [156], Copyright
2010, Elsevier).

x 2 y2

z2

O

x1 y1

z1
H+

O

R2
H
N

H2 N

OH

N
H
O

R1
a 1 b1

c1 a 2

b2

N-terminal fragments
O
R2

R3
c2

a3

b3

C-terminal fragments
O
H
N
OH

H2 N
N
H

O

R1
a2

R3
x1

O

O

R2
H3 N

H2 N

OH

N
H
O

R1

R3

b2
O

y1
O

R2

H2 N

NH3

N
H
O

R1
c2

OH
R3
z1

Figure 17: Nomenclature of the peptide fragments showing some typical qualitative structure of the fragments.

multiple collision condition, by the primary fragment dissociation leading to the secondary ion products (satellites) such
as internal fragments [176], amino acid-specific immonium
ions [177], neutral-loss a/b/y-ions (e.g., bn -NH3 , bn -H2 O,

etc.) [178, 179], and smaller member of b, a, and y-ion
series. All these ions provide peptide sequence information
directly and that is why they are called “direct sequence ion”
[180]. Figure 18 shows a typical example of the CID-MS/MS

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

21

Relative intensity (%)

[M+H]
y4

10

b4
y9

b3

a1

a5

y1 b2274
y

x3
y3

2

−H2 O

b5

1382

y5
a 6 668 y6

0
200

400

600

800
m/z

1000

1200

1400

(a)

[M+2H]2+

Relative intensity (%)

20
b2
a1

2+

−H2 O

10

y11

y4
a2
y1
b1

274 b3

y7

b4
y6

b5

y2

a5

b6

y3

y8 y9

y5

b8

0
200

y10

400

600

800
m/z

b9
1000

1281
1200

1400

1200

1400

(b)

[M+3H]3+
3+

Relative intensity (%)

−H2 O

b5

50
b4
25

y6

y5

F
2+

2+
y6 y7
b3 2+
y
a1
b2 3
b2 y2b2+
6
V/T Y y1 274

y4

b6
y6−17

0
200

400

600

y7
y7−17
b8
b9

800
m/z

1000

(c)

Figure 18: CID-MS/MS spectra of diﬀerent protonated forms of the peptide HSDAVFTDNYTR: (a) CID of singly protonated peptide [M +
H]+ , (b) CID of doubly protonated peptide [M + 2H]2+ , and (c) CID of triply protonated peptide [M + 3H]3+ . (Reprinted with permission
from Analytical Chemistry [157], Copyright 1993, American Chemical Society).

spectra of the diﬀerent protonated forms of the peptide
HSDAVFTDNYTR representing diﬀerent “direct sequence
ions” [157].
The actual mechanism by which the peptide backbone is
cleaved follows complicated pathways. Although the peptide
fragment ions (product ions) were identified long ago [107,
174], it is the recent trend to understand the mechanism
of the fragmentation of gaseous protonated peptides. For
example, recently it has been understood how a singly protonated peptide can fragment to produce the C-terminal/Nterminal fragment ions [181]. The bn -ion does not exist as

acylium cation as shown in Figure 17, rather they form a
cyclic oxazolone structure in the gas phase. Scheme 2 shows
the proposed mechanism of the amide bond cleavage of a
singly protonated peptide [181]. Before the cleavage of a protonated amide bond, the corresponding amide carbonyl is
attacked by the nucleophilic oxygen of the previous amide
carbonyl group and thus makes an oxazolone ring followed
by a proton-bound complex between the oxazolone (N-terminal) and a truncated peptide or amino acid (C-terminal).
Then the fragmentation of the proton-bound complex can
occur by the proton transfer process leading to either bn -ion

22

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
R1
C
H

N
H

H
N

C
O

R2

O

C
H

C

O
H2 R3
N C C
H

R2
N
H

R3 O

HN

H
C

O H2 N
O

R1

C

H
C

O

R3

N
H2
N
H

H
H
C
R1

C
H

C

R2
N
O
O

R2

N
H

H
C
R2

HN
O
O
bn -ion

H3 N

R3

O

C
H

C

y(m−n) -ion

Scheme 2: A mechanism for the production of bn and yn ions.

or yn -ion. Thus, the propensity of the formation of bn or
yn ion is dependent on the relative proton aﬃnities of the
N-terminal oxazolone and the C-terminal truncated peptide/amino acid. The N-terminal oxazolone (bn -ion) can
undergo a neutral loss of carbon monoxide (CO) to form
an -ion. It has also been proposed that the N-terminal a, bfragments are terminated with five membered [182] (oxazolone) ring, via rearrangement type reaction. Generally
the amide bonds N-terminal to proline and C-terminal to
Asp/Glu are more prone to fragmentation [183]. This is
because the tertiary amide nitrogen of the proline residue is
more basic and thus more likely to be protonated than other
backbone amide bonds due to the mobile proton mechanism and thereby leading to enhanced peptide bond cleavage.
The acidic residues Asp/Glu provide “local” mobile proton,
which catalyzes the cleavage at the peptide bonds C-terminal to these residues [183]. It should be noted that the dissociation of the doubly or multiply charged peptide is more
advantageous compared to that of a singly protonated peptide [58]. The population of more than one charge on the
peptide backbone results in more dissociation pathways by

mobile proton mechanism and thus produces more fragment
ions to provide much more sequence information compared
to that derived from the singly protonated peptide. Furthermore, the presence of more than one charge of similar polarity can impart Coulomb repulsion in gas phase rendering
the precursor ion less stable and thereby further contributes
to more facile dissociation. In general the peptide fragmentation is mostly influenced by the charge (e.g., protons), and
thereby the fragmentation is called “charge directed fragmentation” [159, 161].
However, this conventional knowledge of fragmentation
pathways and rules cannot reasonably explain many anomalous fragmentations because it is often the case [157, 184–
187] that abundant fragment ions appear in the MS/MS
spectra of peptides that do not belong to the above-discussed
direct sequence ion series. These fragments are formed in
complex rearrangements and are termed as “nondirect sequence ions” [180]. The nondirect sequence ions discovered so
far include scrambled fragments of the b/a type ions, which is
equivalent to the loss of amino acid residue from the interior

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

23

Y2

1.5 X

Z2

CH2 OH
O

Y1

1

6
CH2 OH

CH2 OH
O

OH

O

O

OH

OH

B1

C1

2.4A
2

4

5
OH
3

OH

OH

Y0 Z0

Z1

B2

C2

O
2

1

O R

OH
B 3 C3

Figure 19: Nomenclature of the product ions formed from the precursor oligosaccharide.

of the peptide chain [180]. As reported in the recent literatures [180, 187–192], the first step of the mechanism concerned to the internal amino acid loss (sequence-scrambling
fragmentation pathway) is a nucleophilic attack by N-terminal α-NH2 group on the acylium carbocation of the b-ion
(a primary fragment) forming a protonated cyclic-peptide intermediate (CPI). This CPI reopens at other sites, producing linear fragment ions where residues are relocated at
the C/N-termini. These linear fragment ions further dissociate via conventional fragmentation pathways, forming
daughter ions with neutral losses of internal residues from
the parent ions. These types of ions are called the nondirect
sequence ions of the protonated parent peptides. At the first
stage of CID, this unique fragmentation of singly charged bions is diﬃcult to be observed. However, under multi-stage
CID, almost all of the investigated b-ions (containing three to
seven residues) notably displayed the above unique fragmentation patterns. The propensity of the sequence scrambling
increases with the increase in the chain length and the charge
states of the peptides [193]. A recent report [194], on the
basis of the analysis of 15,897 low-energy and 10,878 highenergy CID mass spectra of doubly protonated tryptic
peptides, is suggesting that the rate of sequence scrambling
due to b-ion cyclization is negligible (<1%) and can be safely
ignored as a possible source of erroneous sequence assignment in shotgun proteomics. Recently we have also found the
loss of a specific amino acid residue from the interior of
the protonated peptide in gas phase, which follows a degradation mechanism other than the above sequence scrambling
pathway (unpublished work).
Although historically the peptide fragmentation is performed on the gaseous protonated peptides to derive the
sequence information [173], fewer eﬀorts have been invested
on the dissociation of the gaseous deprotonated peptides.
Hence the dissociation pathways of the deprotonated peptides are not well established [173]. It should be noted that
in negative ion mode the –OH functional groups in serine,
threonine, and tyrosine side-chains and –COOH functional
groups in glutamic and aspartic acid side-chains are the
potential deprotonation sites [195, 196]. Fragmentation of
deprotonated peptides has been shown to provide complementary structural information to their positive counterparts [196–198]. Therefore, sequencing unknown peptides
can benefit from the interpretation of both positive and negative mass spectra.

Several aspects of CID of the protonated peptides are still
under controversy. It is continuously being debated where
exactly the proton is located before the amide bond cleavage,
whether the location is carbonyl oxygen or amide nitrogen
[107, 164, 168, 171, 199, 200]. How exactly the fragmentation
pattern is dependent on the amino acid sequence of the
precursor peptides and how diﬀerent fragments get stabilized? Apart from sequence informative ions, there are lots
of anomalous fragments, which are observed in the MS/MS
spectra of the peptides. As a future outlook the detail understanding of the formation of those anomalous fragment ions
is required and that continuously drawing the attention of
the mass spectroscopists.
8.4. CID of Oligosaccharides. The analytical and structural
characterization of carbohydrates or saccharides (highly
abundant biological compounds) is quite a challenging problem because of the diversity of the linkage types, linkage position, and anomeric configuration [201]. Analogous to the
peptide cleavage in the gas phase, the gaseous protonated/
metallated oligosaccharides also undergo facile cleavages in
certain specific positions upon CID. A systematic nomenclature (see Figure 19) of the diﬀerent product ions produced
from a precursor oligosaccharide was introduced [202] by
Domon and Costello in 1988. Under low-energy collision
conditions, the abundant product ions (B, C, Y, and Z) are
generated by the glycosidic bond cleavages. But the highenergy collision conditions tend to favor cross ring cleavages,
which produces “A” or “X” type fragments (see Figure 19)
[203]. These cross-ring cleavage preferably produced by
charge remote fragmentation from the sodium adduct of
the precursor analyte [203]. The dominant pathway for the
ion decomposition is highly dependent on the nature of
the precursor ion, that is, protonated or metallated, or the
cationic or anionic adduct species [203–207]. Generally for
protonated oligosaccharides, the protons are mainly located
on the glycosidic oxygen and thereby induce the cleavage of
either C1 –O bond or C4 –O bond (see Figure 19) [202, 204].
The C1 –O and C4 –O bond cleavages give rise to the formation of Bn /Ym and Ci /Z j complementary ions, respectively,
via “ion-dipole complex” mechanism involving an oxonium
ion [58] (see Schemes 3 and 4).
8.5. CID of Oligonucleotides. Low energy CID is also useful
for the structural elucidation of nucleic acids like DNA, RNA,

24

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

CH2 OH
O
OH

RO

CH2 OH
O
OH

H
O

OH

OH
CH2 OH
O
OH H

RO

OR

CH2 OH
O
OH

,

OR

OH
OH
CH2 OH
O
OH

RO

H− transfer

OH

CH2 OH
O
OH

,

OR

OH
OH

OH

H+ transfer

RO

CH2 OH
O
OH H

CH2 OH
O
OH

H
OR

OH
OH

OH

Ym

Bn

Scheme 3: The proposed mechanism of the formation of Bn and Ym product ions via ion-dipole complex.

CH2 OH
RO

CH2 OH

H

O

O

OH

OR

OH

O

OH

OH

H
H− transfer
CH2 OH

CH2 OH

O

O
RO

OR

,

OH
OH

HO

OH

OH

H+ transfer
CH2 OH

CH2 OH
O

RO
H

O
OR

OH
OH
OH
Ci

HO

OH
Zj

Scheme 4: Proposed mechanism of the formation of Ci & Z j product ions via ion-dipole complex.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
w3

x3

B1
5
HO

y3

z3

w2

x2

B2

O
O

25

P

b1

w1

x1

B3

P

O

O

c1

d1

a2

b2

y1

z1
B4

O
O

P

OH

3

O

O

O
a1

z2

O
O

O

y2

c2

d2

a3

b3

c3

d3

Figure 20: Nomenclature of the fragment ions produced by the CID of oligonucleotides.

and so forth, [208]. Polyanionic oligonucleotides derived
from DNA/RNA can be eﬃciently transferred to the gasphase by ESI. Those oligonucleotides undergo selective fragmentation in CID producing ladder-like product ion spectra
similar to that produced by peptides. A systematic nomenclature was proposed by McLuckey et al. [208] to describe
the product/fragment ions generated by CID of the oligonucleotide (see Figure 20). Cleavage of the four types of phosphodiester bond yields eight types of fragments for example,
an , bn , cn , and dn , which contain the 5 -OH group, and
wn , xn , yn , and zn , which contain 3 -OH group. The subscript “n” represents the number of residues contained in
the fragments and thus designates the position of cleavage.
Sometimes additional loss of a purine/pyrimidine base (Bn )
is indicated by parenthesis with the identity of the base (if
possible). For example, the fragment a4 -B4 (A) indicates
the cleavage of the bond between ribose carbon and the
oxygen of the phosphodiester group at position 3, with the
additional loss of adenosine base at the same position. ESIMS/MS spectra of the oligonucleotides are generally dominated by an , an -Bn , dn , and wn -ions. Other types of fragments are also possible by some complex rearrangement type
reaction. Several fragmentation pathways have been proposed to explain the formation of the complimentary ions
in gas phase by the precursor oligonucleotides [209–213].
Scheme 5 shows the typical mechanisms [213] of the formation of an , an -Bn , dn , and wn -ions from the oligonucleotide
anion upon CID.
8.6. CID of Lipids. Lipids are a broad group of naturally
occurring hydrophobic organic molecules, which includes fatty acyls, glycerolipids, glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, sterol lipids, prenol lipids, saccharolipids, and polyketides [215]. Mass spectrometry plays a key role in the structural elucidation and quantification of these molecules. It is
beyond the scope here to discuss details about the CID of all
classes of lipids. Here we would only discuss about the CID
of two typical lipid molecules, for example, fatty acids and
bile acids. Fatty acids are long hydrocarbon chain of varying
length and varying degree of unsaturation, terminated by a
carboxylic acid functional group. Bile acids are derived from
cholesterol, and they contain a 5β steroid ring made up of
four fused cycles bearing a side-chain attached to the C-17
carbon atom of the cycle, terminated by a carboxylic group
(see Figure 22). They diﬀer from each other by the number
and position of the hydroxyl/keto groups and by the presence of unsaturation in the cycle. The bile acids can exist

as free carboxylic acids or amide conjugates of the carboxylic groups with glycine (NH2 CH2 CO2 H) or taurine
(NH2 CH2 CH2 SO3 H).
The fragmentation of fatty acids and bile acids is believed
to occur via mechanisms that do not involve the charged
group directly and thus termed as charge-remote fragmentation (CRF) mechanisms [162, 214, 216, 217]. A typical
example of the CRF of a pseudomolecular anion has been
shown in Scheme 6, which either involves a simple homolytic
cleavage [218] or a 1,4-H2 elimination [216] to produce distonic radical anion or terminally unsaturated anion.
When fatty acids are electrosprayed in negative ion mode,
they produce [M−H]− ions in gas phase. Upon collisional
activation, the CRF of the chain in diﬀerent positions occurs.
According to the nature of the bond, which is broken,
diﬀerent symbols of the product ions are used [214]. When a
regular C–C bond is broken, this is represented by C, a vinyl
bond by V, an allyl bond by A, a homoallyl bond by H, and
a double bond by D. A subscript to the right of the capital
letter (e.g., Cn ) indicates the number of the carbon atoms
remaining in the corresponding charged fatty acid fragment.
A prime symbol to the left of the capital letter (product
ion symbol) indicates that the product ion is deficient in
one hydrogen atom relative to a fragment ion formed by
homolytic cleavage at the same site of a hypothetical precursor molecule, and M−• ([M−H]− is deficient one hydrogen relative to M−• ). Multiple hydrogen deficiencies are
denoted by multiple prime symbols to the left of the letter
[214]. Figure 21 shows the fragmentation characteristic of a
saturated fatty acid (stearic acid) and an unsaturated fatty
acid (oleic acid) under high energy collision conditions
[214]. Both the fatty acids show their unique backbone fragmentation pattern.
Similarly the charge remote ring cleavage of the bile acids
also occurs, resulting in ring opening, loss of neutral ethylene, and double-bond formation on the product ions.
Griﬃths et al. have developed a systematic nomenclature (see
Figure 22) to interpret the fragment ions produced by the
CID of the bile acids [217, 219]. The rings are labeled as
(a), (b), (c), (d) from left to right (see Figure 22), and the
corresponding capital letter is used to indicate which ring is
opened and broken in the cross-ring cleavage. The subscript
(1, 2, and 3) to the right side of the capital letter indicates
the cross-ring cleavage site on that ring. Again the “prime”
symbol to the left of the letter is used to keep track of hydrogen deficiencies as discussed above.

26

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

O
O P OH
O

O

O
O P O
O

O
O P OH
O

Base

O

O

O
O P OH
O
O

O
O P OH
O
O

Base

O
O P OH
O

O

H
an -Bn

H

−Base

Base

Base

O

O
O P O
O

Base

H
O
O P O
O
O

O
O P OH
O

Base

O
O P OH
O

O
O P OH
O

O
O P OH
O

O

Base

O
HO P OH
O
dn

Base

O

O
O P OH
O
wn

O
O P OH
O
O
O P OH
O
O
O P O
O

1

Base

O

1

H
O
2 O
P OH
O

O

2

Base

O
O P OH
O

Base

O

O
O P OH
O
wn

OH
O P OH
O

O
O P OH
O

O

Base

−Base

an -Bn

an
O

Base

O
O P OH
O
wn

Scheme 5: The fragmentation mechanism of the oligonucleotide in two diﬀerent ways. The mechanism in the upper panel shows the
necessity of a charge proximate to the cleavage site. The mechanism in the lower panel does not require the charge proximate.

H

H

R2−

R

H
R

H

R2−

H

H

R

+

R1−

R

+ 2H +

R1−

R

+H2 +

R1−

Scheme 6: The charge remote fragmentation (CRF) mechanism for
the formation of distonic ions (anions) and terminally unsaturated
ions (anions).

9. Application of ESI-MS
After the discovery of the ESI-MS, its application areas
rapidly expanded from large macromolecules to small

organic and inorganic molecules. Nowadays the ion signals
in the ESI-mass spectra are providing a clear and deep perception about the analytes properties far beyond the conventional mass and structural properties of the analytes. Here we
will discuss in brief about certain applications of the ESI-MS.
9.1. Protein Identification and Characterization. Since mass is
a very specific property of a molecule, determination of the
molecular weight with high precision allows to solve many
problems in proteomics. Over the past twenty years, ESImass spectrometry has emerged as a powerful tool in the
life science to determine the identity [220–222], quantity
[223, 224], and structural properties [6, 225–227] of the protein molecules. Mass spectrometry is a very fast process to
verify the structure and purity of the proteins and peptides

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

27

%

100
71 
C3
95
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
90
16
6
4
2
14
12
10
8
C O−
85 
C
2
80
C
C
C
C


C
C9 C7
C3
17
15
13
11
5
75
70
C
4
65 CO
2
86
60
55 44
50
C 
7 C8 
45
C
C9 C
6
10

C
40
3 C5 C6
C
127 141
11 
35
155
C12
114
169
C
30
13
99
183
C
C
C
197
25
14 
5
17
C15 C16
211
20
225
15
268
240 254
10
55 62
106
206
5
60

40

80

100

120

140

160
m/z

180

200

220

240

260

(a)
C

C

17

15

C

16

%

100
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

C

71

C

2

C

C

A

13

H

14

D

11

A

9

V

12

A

3

3

C

6

8

O

C

5

H

V

10

C

7

4

C O−
C

2

11

182

CO2
44
C

A

4

3

C
C

60

12

A

100 114
5

A

195

100

120

C

V

8

7

D

9

141
80

11

5 
H6 H 6

55
40

H

127

86
C

7

140

13

V

10

209

14

223

155 167
160
m/z

C

180

200

220

C

15

C

16

C

17

238 252 266
240

260

(b)

Figure 21: 400 eV (Elab ) CID spectra of stearic acid (a) and oleic acid (b) pseudomolecular anion. (Reprinted with permission from Rapid
Communication in Mass Spectrometry [214], Copyright 1996, John Wiley and Sons).

[222, 228]. Classically the determination of the primary
structure of the protein (i.e., the amino acid sequence)
requires a chemical approach called Edman degradation
method [229]. But this technique is time consuming, and
a large quantity of the protein sample is also required. But
after the discovery of LC-ESI-MS, the mass spectrometry is
the most eﬃcient way of sequencing a protein [107, 160,
230, 231]. In this MS method, the protein is digested by

an endopeptidase (e.g., trypsin, chymotrypsin, pepsin, etc.),
which cut the protein into small peptide/polypeptide fragments very specifically. Then the digest mixture is passed
through the high-performance liquid chromatography where
the collection of peptide fragments is separated. At the end of
the column the individual peptide fragment is electrosprayed
in vacuum, where they are trapped and allowed to undergo
collision activation to produce MS/MS spectra as discussed

28

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
F/ F
G

E/ E

C

R
1

H

X
c

a

d

C

3

b

B

R

R

I/I

O
D

D

2

1

3

B

2

A

3

X − = O− (free acid)
−

= NHCH2 CH2 SO3 (taurine conjugates)
−

= NHCH2 CO2 (glycine conjugates)

Figure 22: The charge remote fragmentation of bile acids (metabolites of cholesterol) with the nomenclature of diﬀerent fragments.

above [160, 231]. The resulting MS/MS spectra are nothing
but the mass fingerprints of the ladder-like product ions of
the peptide of a particular sequence. The MS/MS spectra of
the peptides are usually assigned with the help of various
bioinformatic tools that implement sequencing algorithms
based on peptide fragmentation chemistry as discussed
before [160, 231, 232]. Thus the peptide mass fingerprinting
(PMF) helps to identify the amino acid sequence of the whole
proteins. The process is repeated using diﬀerent digestion
enzymes, and the overlaps of the resulting sequences are used
to construct a sequence of the protein. When the identification of the proteins is solely based on the sequence data
obtained from the tandem mass analysis, it is called “de novo
sequencing” [232], and the corresponding procedure (as
discussed above) of the protein analysis is called “bottomup” approach [233, 234].
Sometimes intact charged protein generated by ESI is
introduced into the mass analyzer and are subjected to gasphase fragmentation, and this type of approach is referred to
as the “top-down” strategy of protein analysis [235].
Although the ESI-MS technique is not sensitive to probe
the local conformation of the polypeptide chain, that is, the
secondary structure of the protein, the technique can successfully interpret the three-dimensional conformation of the
proteins [76]. As discussed already that the charge state distribution actually represents the three dimensional folding
or the tertiary structure of the proteins [76]. This property
makes ESI-MS an excellent method, complimentary to CD
(circular dichroism), to characterize the protein conformational change. Hence an increasing interest based on ESIMS is continuously developing to study the protein folding
process.
ESI-MS can also successfully detect the posttranslational
modifications (PTMs) [236, 237] and the mutation [238] of

the proteins as those processes lead to the change of protein
masses. Not only does the total mass change, but also the
position or point of the PTM or mutation can be determined
by tandem mass spectrometric experiments [222, 239]. Recently, using tandem mass spectrometric technique, we have
identified the reactive lysine residues of cytochrome c [240].
We found that the lysine residues, which are in the turn or
loop region of the protein, are more reactive to succinylation
compared to those which are in the helical region. It has
been proposed that the lower reactivity of the lysine residues
present in the helical regions might be due to the higher
rigidity of the helical region than that of the turn or loop
region [240]. In another study [241], using tandem mass
spectrometry we have determined the molecular basis of
the PTM involving covalent attachment of the heme with a
glutamic acid of the protein matrix in the Cytochrome P450
enzyme.
Disulphide bonds (a kind of PTM) play important roles
in the structure and biological activity of the cystinyl proteins. So the determination of the disulphide bond linkage
between two adjacent or closely spaced cysteine residues
is an integral part of the structural characterization of the
proteins. Several mass spectrometry-based strategies have
been developed to map the disulphide bond linkages in the
proteins [242–247]. Most of the time, the protein of interest
is cleaved enzymatically in its nonreduced states, and then
the resulting disulphide-linked peptides are separated, identified, and characterized by LC-MS technique. Then the data
is compared with the similar experiments performed on the
disulphide-reduced protein of the interest [243]. This comparison study can locate the disulphide linkages in the folded
proteins. Sometimes chemical cleavage at disulphide residues
followed by chemical derivatization is also performed for the

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
mass spectrometric study to identify the disulphide linkages
in the proteins [247].
9.2. Studying Noncovalent Interaction. Since ESI is a suﬃciently soft ionization technique, the noncovalent complexes
of the analytes formed in solution can representatively, transferred to the gas phase when appropriate instrumental conditions are used [225, 248–250]. Mainly a collection of weak
interactions such as Van der Waals forces, hydrophobic
forces, and hydrogen bonding or salt bridges (electrostatic
interactions) are responsible for the analyte association in
solution. When the analyte is transformed in the gas-phase
via ESI, probably most of those interactions are retained, and
some of those interactions become more prominent in the
gas phase compared to solution and thus provide the structural integrity in the gas phase [251–253]. Generally the propensities of the ionic interactions become more in the gas
phase compared to solution [251–253]. For example, a recent
ESI-MS study of the protonated and deprotonated gaseous
ions of a single chain antibody-trisaccharide complex has
showen several specific intermolecular H-bonds in the gas
phase [254]. Likewise a recent report, shown that, in the
presence of K+ , Rb+ , and Cs+ , uracil, thymine, and their
homologues form self-assembled quintet structures that are
stabilized by hydrogen bonding and ion-dipole interactions
in the gas phase [255]. ESI-MS has allowed the observation
of a large number of biomolecular noncovalent complexes
such as protein-protein [256, 257], protein-metal ion [258],
protein-drug [259], and protein-nucleic acid [260] complexes. Since proteins provide a large number of functional
groups for the noncovalent interaction with the partner
molecule(s), the resultant noncovalent forces are large
enough to retain the association during their transfer from
condensed to the gas phase. But, in small molecules for example, in small peptides, this number of noncovalently interacting atoms with proper orientation for the intermolecular
interaction is less and it is sometimes very diﬃcult to probe
their association in solution by ESI technique. Recently
we have shown the formation of noncovalent dimers of
the lysine containing basic peptides by ESI-MS [253],
which demonstrated that the intermolecular electrostatic/Hbonding network is mainly responsible for the dimer formation of those small peptides in the gas phase. ESI-mass spectrometry also evolved as a valuable tool for the determination
of the association/dissociation constants for several proteinligand complexes [261]. Although the gas-phase studies on
the proterin-ligand complexes have been primarily focused
on the complexes, which are stabilized by the ionic interaction or H-bonding, the nonpolar intermolecular interaction
between protein (bovine β-lactoglobulin) and ligand (fatty
acids) in vacuum has also been reported lately [262]. The
corresponding interaction strength of the nonpolar proteinligand complexes has also been quantified.
It is very diﬃcult to ionize the hydrophobic proteins by
ESI because of their inherent insolubility in the buﬀers compatible with electrospray. For this reason the ESI-mass spectrometry has not been applied to intact membrane protein
complexes. But recently Barrera et al. have been successful to
transfer some hydrophobic membrane protein complexes in

29
vacuum via ESI by encapsulation in a solution phase detergent micelle [263].
The ESI-MS has also been used to study the complexes
between polyether (e.g., crown ethers) and protonated peptides [264, 265]. The protonated amine functional groups
make hydrogen bonds with the oxygen atoms of the crown
ethers in those complexes. The energy-variable collisioninduced dissociation was carried out to analyze the strengths
of noncovalent interactions of protonated peptide/polyether
complexes [264, 265].
9.3. In Clinical Laboratory. Since ESI-MS is a sensitive,
robust, and reliable tool for studying the femtomole samples
in microlitre volumes, it has become an increasingly important technique in the clinical laboratory for structural study
or quantitative measurement of metabolites in a complex
biological sample [266]. For example, HPLC/ESI-MS is useful to a great extent than other conventional techniques in
screening for inborn errors of amino acid [267, 268], fatty
acid [269], purine [270], pyrimidine [270] metabolism, and
diagnosis of galactosaemia [271] and peroxisomal [272, 273]
disorders. Because of the preservation of the noncovalent
interaction in gas phase, ESI-MS has nurtured a new and improved approach (versus electrophoresis) for identification
and quantification of haemoglobin variants [274]. With the
understanding of glycohaemoglobin structure, an IFCC reference method for glycohaemoglobin assay has been established using ESI-MS [275]. It also represents a promising
strategy for the standardisation of HbA1c in diabetic monitoring [276]. With its other applications such as in therapeutic drug monitoring and identification of biomarkers
[277, 278], ESI-MS will continue to exert a more important
influence in the clinical laboratory in near future.
9.4. Probing Molecular Dynamics: H/D-Exchange Experiments. The application of the ESI-MS is not only restricted
to the structural characterization, but it has also been extended recently to the study of the molecular dynamics. For this
type of application, the analyte ions produced by the ESI-ion
source are trapped and subjected to the ion-molecule reaction (H/D exchange) with some gaseous deuterated molecules possessing exchangeable deuterium (e.g., CH3 OD,
ND3 , etc.) for well-defined reaction intervals in the collision
cell [279]. As a result the H/D-exchange between analyte and
the deuterated molecules occurs in the gas phase and thus
provides some critical information regarding the molecular
motion in the noncovalent complexes. For example, the
H/D exchange reactions have been applied to uncover the
tumbling motion of ammonium guests bound inside the cavity of resorcinarene hosts [280]. Very recently a highly dynamic motion of the crown ethers along the oligolysine peptide
chains has been probed by H/D-exchange experiments in the
gas phase [281]. The authors suggested this phenomenon as
the wire dance on the molecular level. It has been observed
that the crown ethers (guest molecules) can move directly
between diﬀerent binding sites of the oligolysine (a multitopic host) without intermediate dissociation. Furthermore,
the exchange experiments unambiguously revealed the zwitterionic structure of the crown ether/oligolysine complexes,

30
highlighting the success of the gas-phase experiments for
investigating noncovalent interactions [281].
The gas-phase folding and unfolding of the protein
(protein dynamics) can also be monitored by the H/D-exchange experiments [282, 283]. Valuable information regarding the protein conformation in vacuum has also come out
by the gas-phase isotope exchange experiments [138, 284,
285]. Similarly several ion-molecule reactions in gas-phase
have been used for the covalent modification of the gaseous
analyte [286].
9.5. Monitoring Chemical Reactions and Studying Reactive
Intermediates. The applications of ESI-MS have also been explored in synthetic organic and organometallic chemistry to
study the reactive intermediates and the mechanisms [287–
292]. For example, catalytic intermediate of the Suzuki coupling reaction [289] and the Heck reaction mechanism [291]
has been studied by ESI-MS. Raney nickel-catalyzed coupling
reaction of 2-bromo-6-methylpyridine was studied, and a
reactive dimer of the intermediate Ni[II] complex of 6,6 -dimethyl-2,2 -bipyridine was detected [293]. Desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (DESI-MS) has been
used for monitoring solid-state organic reaction in ambient
air, specifically the Bayer-Villiger type reactions involving the
oxidation of ketones by m-chloroperbenzoic acid in solid
state [294]. The 1-adamantyl radicals have been identified as
a reactive intermediate in several organic syntheses. Recently
a tert-adamantyl peroxyl radical has been trapped in gas
phase using ESI-MS, and its unusual structure and reactivity
has been investigated [295]. Many other types of the reaction
mechanisms investigated by the ESI-MS technique have
recently been reviewed by Eberlin [296].
9.6. Chemical Imaging. Desorption electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry (DESI-MS) is relatively a new ambient
surface analysis method. The development of imaging mass
spectrometry by DESI has been described recently [297–
299], and its application to high-throughput biological tissue
imaging was also demonstrated [298]. In this technique the
spatial distribution (on the tissue surface) as well as structural identification of the molecule of interest can be accomplished successfully [298]. Chemical imaging by DESI has
been applied to label-free detection of drugs and metabolites
in tissue [298]. DESI-MS imaging is advantage in a number
of ways over the conventional whole-body autoradiography
approach: (1) no radioactive label is required and (2) it
allows simultaneous detection of the parent drug compound and metabolites in tissue [300]. DESI also holds the
advantages of speed and specificity inherent in the mass spectrometric experiment. Chemical imaging by DESI-MS is still,
however, in its early childhood. The ongoing research activities in this area address the questions concerning sensitivity,
compound-specific ionization yields, tissue-specific ion suppression, and eﬀects of solvent composition on ionization
yields. An insight on these issues would immensely widen
the horizon of applications of this technique in assessing
more complex and quantitative information on the samples
that would have important medical and pharmaceutical implications.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

10. Future Prospects and Outlook
The development of electrospray ionization mass spectrometry has enabled us to solve a wide range of biochemical and mechanistic problems as discussed above.
Perhaps it is one of the instruments that has continuously
evolved over the last three decades both in application
and modification of instrument design. For example, the
transition of source design from microspray to nanospray
has improved the sensitivity. Introduction of high-resolution
mass analyzer (FT-ICR) amended the accuracy and redefined
the applicability.
Yet in several aspects, the understanding of the ESI-MS
remains vague to date. One of the major issues is the exact
mechanism of ion formation. How is the gas-phase ion formation guided mechanistically? Is the perception of CRM
and IEM enough to interpret the ion formation? It is still
unclear about the analyte behavior (structure and dynamics)
inside the charged droplets produced by ES process. If the
proteins change their structure inside the charged droplet,
then the charge state distribution (CSD) should reflect the
instantaneous conformation of the protein inside the charged droplet not in the original solution. Again, as discussed
in the present review, the CSD is not influenced by a specific
parameter but governed by multiple parameters. So the precise understanding of the cumulative eﬀect of those diﬀerent
parameters on the protein CSD would no doubt help to earn
more quantitative insights about structural and chemical
behavior of the proteins.
So far a little attention was invoked on the detector characterization and improvement compared to that of the ion
source and mass analyzer. So, the characterization and improvement of the detector would likely be the next step in
the development of mass spectrometry which would enable
us to give the answer whether the ion signal intensity is
governed by the molecular conformation of the analyte or
not.
The application of the ESI-MS got a noteworthy dimension in biochemistry laboratories after its success in protein
sequencing. The sequencing is based on the idea and information of gas-phase ion fragmentation chemistry of the peptides in the tandem mass spectrometry. But the tandem mass
spectra of the peptides are mostly dominated by anomalous
fragment ions than the “sequence informative ions.” So the
characterization of those anomalous fragments and accordingly the modification of sequencing algorithms would facilitate the sequencing of proteins/peptides more precisely and
rapidly using mass-spectrometric technique.

Acknowledgments
Authors are thankful to Mr. Abhishek Acharya, Max Planck
Institute for Biophysics, Germany, for his help. The financial
support for this endeavor was provided by Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research, Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry

References
[1] J. J. Thomson, Rays of Positive Electricity and Their Applications to Chemical Analysis, Longmans Green, London, UK,
1913.
[2] M. Grayson, “John Bennett Fenn: a curious road to the prize,”
Journal of The American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol.
22, no. 8, pp. 1301–1308, 2011.
[3] M. Barber, R. S. Bordoli, R. D. Sedgwick, and A. N. Tyler,
“Fast atom bombardment of solids (F.A.B.): a new ion source
for mass spectrometry,” Journal of the Chemical Society,
Chemical Communications, no. 7, pp. 325–327, 1981.
[4] J. B. Fenn, M. Mann, C. K. Meng, S. F. Wong, and C. M.
Whitehouse, “Electrospray ionization for mass spectrometry
of large biomolecules,” Science, vol. 246, no. 4926, pp. 64–71,
1989.
[5] M. Przybylski and M. O. Glocker, “Electrospray mass spectrometry of biomacromolecular complexes with noncovalent
interactions—New analytical perspectives for supramolecular chemistry and molecular recognition processes,” Angewandte Chemie, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 807–826, 1996.
[6] B. Domon and R. Aebersold, “Mass spectrometry and protein analysis,” Science, vol. 312, no. 5771, pp. 212–217, 2006.
[7] J. B. Fenn, “Electrospray wings for molecular elephants
(Nobel lecture),” Angewandte Chemie, vol. 42, no. 33, pp.
3871–3894, 2003.
[8] Z. Ouyang, Z. Takáts, T. A. Blake et al., “Preparing protein
microarrays by soft-landing of mass-selected ions,” Science,
vol. 301, no. 5638, pp. 1351–1354, 2003.
[9] B. Gologan, Z. Takáts, J. Alvarez et al., “Ion soft-landing into
liquids: protein identification, separation, and purification
with retention of biological activity,” Journal of the American
Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 1874–1884,
2004.
[10] S. R. Wilson and Y. Wu, “Applications of electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry to neutral organic molecules
including fullerenes,” Journal of the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 596–603, 1993.
[11] C. E. C. A. Hop and R. Bakhtiar, “Electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry. Part III: applications in inorganic chemistry and synthetic polymer chemistry,” Journal of Chemical
Education, vol. 73, no. 8, pp. A162–A169, 1996.
[12] M. J. Keith-Roach, “A review of recent trends in electrospray
ionisation-mass spectrometry for the analysis of metalorganic ligand complexes,” Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 678,
no. 2, pp. 140–148, 2010.
[13] I. Leito, K. Herodes, M. Huopolainen et al., “Towards the
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry ionization eﬃciency scale of organic compounds,” Rapid Communications
in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 379–384, 2008.
[14] M. Oss, A. Kruve, K. Herodes, and I. Leito, “Electrospray
ionization eﬃciency scale of organic compound,” Analytical
Chemistry, vol. 82, no. 7, pp. 2865–2872, 2010.
[15] A. G. Baily, Electrostatic Spraying of Liquids, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, NY, USA, 1988.
[16] M. Dole, L. L. Mack, R. L. Hines et al., “Molecular beams of
macroions,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 49, no. 5,
pp. 2240–2249, 1968.
[17] L. L. Mack, P. Kralik, A. Rheude, and M. Dole, “Molecular
beams of macroions. II,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol.
52, no. 10, pp. 4977–4986, 1970.
[18] M. Yamashita and J. B. Fenn, “Electrospray ion source.
Another variation on the free-jet theme,” Journal of Physical
Chemistry, vol. 88, no. 20, pp. 4451–4459, 1984.

31
[19] M. Yamashita and J. B. Fenn, “Negative ion production with
the electrospray ion source,” Journal of Physical Chemistry,
vol. 88, no. 20, pp. 4671–4675, 1984.
[20] C. M. Whitehouse, R. N. Dreyer, M. Yamashita, and J. B.
Fenn, “Electrospray interface for liquid chromatographs and
mass spectrometers,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 57, no. 3, pp.
675–679, 1985.
[21] A. P. Bruins, “Mass spectrometry with ion sources operating
at atmospheric pressure,” Mass Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 53–77, 1991.
[22] P. Kebarle and L. Tang, “From ions in solution to ions in the
gas phase: the mechanism of electrospray mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 65, no. 22, pp. 972A–986A,
1993.
[23] M. Karas, U. Bahr, and T. Dülcks, “Nano-electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: addressing analytical problems
beyond routine,” Fresenius’ Journal of Analytical Chemistry,
vol. 366, no. 6-7, pp. 669–676, 2000.
[24] J. F. Anacleto, S. Pleasance, and R. K. Boyd, “Calibration of
ion spray mass spectra using cluster ions,” Organic Mass Spectrometry, vol. 27, pp. 660–666, 1992.
[25] C. E. C. A. Hop, “Generation of high molecular weight cluster
ions by electrospray ionization; implications for mass calibration,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 31, pp. 1314–1316,
1996.
[26] A. P. Bruins, T. R. Covey, and J. D. Henion, “Ion spray
interface for combined liquid chromatography/atmospheric
pressure ionization mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 59, no. 22, pp. 2642–2646, 1987.
[27] T. R. Covey, A. P. Bruins, and J. D. Henion, “Comparison of
thermospray and ion spray mass spectrometry in an atmospheric pressure ion source,” Organic Mass Spectrometry, vol.
23, pp. 178–186, 1988.
[28] M. G. Ikonomou, A. T. Blades, and P. Kebarle, “Electrosprayion spray: a comparison of mechanisms and performance,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 63, no. 18, pp. 1989–1998, 1991.
[29] J. F. Banks, J. P. Quinn, and C. M. Whilehouse, “LC/ESI-MS
determination of proteins using conventional liquid chromatography and ultrasonically assisted electrospray,” Analytical
Chemistry, vol. 66, no. 21, pp. 3688–3695, 1994.
[30] J. F. Banks, S. Shen, C. M. Whitehouse, and J. B. Fenn,
“Ultrasonically assisted electrospray ionization for LC/MS
determination of nucleosides from a transfer RNA digest,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 406–414, 1994.
[31] Z. Takáts, J. M. Wiseman, B. Gologan, and R. G. Cooks,
“Electrosonic spray ionization. A gentle technique for generating folded proteins and protein complexes in the gas phase
and for studying ion-molecule reactions at atmospheric pressure,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 76, no. 14, pp. 4050–4058,
2004.
[32] M. Wilm and M. Mann, “Analytical properties of the nanoelectrospray ion source,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 68, no. 1,
pp. 1–8, 1996.
[33] E. D. Hoﬀmann and V. Stroobant, Mass Spectrometry Principles and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK,
2nd edition, 2001.
[34] J. H. Gross, Mass Spectrometry, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, 2004.
[35] R. E. March, “An introduction to quadrupole ion trap mass
spectrometry,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 32, no. 4,
pp. 351–369, 1997.
[36] J. S. Allen, “An improved electron multiplier particle counter,” Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 739–
749, 1947.

32
[37] H. E. Stanton, W. A. Chupka, and M. G. Inghram, “Electron
multipliers in mass spectrometry; eﬀect of molecular structure,” Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 27, no. 2, p. 109,
1956.
[38] I. J. Amster, “Fourier transform mass spectrometry,” Journal
of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 1325–1337, 1996.
[39] J. B. Fenn, “Ion formation from charged droplets: roles of
geometry, energy, and time,” Journal of the American Society
for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 524–535, 1993.
[40] J. F. J. Todd, “Recommendations for nomenclature and symbolism for mass spectroscopy,” Pure and Applied Chemistry,
vol. 63, pp. 1541–1566, 1991.
[41] T. R. Covey, R. F. Bonner, B. I. Shushan, and J. Henion,
“The determination of protein, oligonucleotide and peptide
molecular weights by ion-spray mass spectrometry,” Rapid
Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 2, no. 11, pp.
249–256, 1988.
[42] J. R. Chapman, R. T. Gallagher, E. C. Barton, J. M. Curtis, and
P. J. Derrick, “Advantages of high-resolution and high-mass
range magnetic-sector mass spectrometry for electrospray
ionization,” Organic Mass Spectrometry, vol. 27, pp. 195–203,
1992.
[43] M. Mann, C. K. Meng, and J. B. Fenn, “Interpreting mass
spectra of multiply charged ions,” Analytical Chemistry, vol.
61, no. 15, pp. 1702–1708, 1989.
[44] M. Labowsky, C. Whitehouse, and J. B. Fenn, “Three-dimensional deconvolution of multiply charged spectra,” Rapid
Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 7, pp. 71–84,
1993.
[45] G. Wang and R. B. Cole, “Eﬀect of solution intic strength on
analyte charge state distributions in positive and negative ion
electrospray mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol.
66, no. 21, pp. 3702–3708, 1994.
[46] R. Guevremont, K. W. M. Siu, J. C. Y. Le Blanc, and S.
S. Berman, “Are the electrospray mass spectra of proteins
related to their aqueous solution chemistry?” Journal of the
American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 216–
224, 1992.
[47] M. A. Kelly, M. M. Vestling, C. C. Fenselau, and P. B. Smith,
“Electrospray analysis of proteins: a comparison of positiveion and negative-ion mass spectra at high and low pH,” Organic Mass Spectrometry, vol. 27, pp. 1143–1147, 1992.
[48] G. Wang and R. B. Cole, “Disparity between solutionphase equilibria and charge state distributions in positive-ion
electrospray mass spectrometry,” Organic Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 29, pp. 419–427, 1994.
[49] J. C. Y. Le Blanc, J. Wang, R. Guevremont, and K. W. M. Siu,
“Electrospray mass spectra of protein cations formed in basic
solutions,” Organic Mass Spectrometry, vol. 29, pp. 587–593,
1994.
[50] J. A. Loo, C. G. Edmonds, H. R. Udseth, and R. D. Smith,
“Eﬀect of reducing disulfide-containing proteins on electrospray ionization mass spectra,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 62,
no. 7, pp. 693–698, 1990.
[51] R. D. Smith, J. A. Loo, R. R. Ogorzalek Loo, M. Busman,
and H. R. Udseth, “Principles and practice of electrospray
ionization-mass spectrometry for large polypeptides and
proteins,” Mass Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 359–
451, 1991.
[52] M. Cloupeau and B. Prunet-Foch, “Electrostatic spraying of
liquids: main functioning,” Journal of Electrostatics, vol. 25,
pp. 165–184, 1990.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[53] R. B. Cole, “Some tenets pertaining to electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 35, no.
7, pp. 763–772, 2000.
[54] P. Kebarle and M. Peschke, “On the mechanisms by which the
charged droplets produced by electrospray lead to gas phase
ions,” Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 406, no. 1, pp. 11–35,
2000.
[55] N. B. Cech and C. G. Enke, “Practical implications of some
recent studies in electrospray ionization fundamentals,” Mass
Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 362–387, 2001.
[56] A. T. Blades, M. G. Ikonomou, and P. Kebarle, “Mechanism of
electrospray mass spectrometry. Electrospray as an electrolysis cell,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 63, no. 19, pp. 2109–2114,
1991.
[57] G. Diehl and U. Karst, “On-line electrochemistry—MS and
related techniques,” Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry,
vol. 373, no. 6, pp. 390–398, 2002.
[58] R. B. Cole, Electrospray and MALDI Mass Spectrometry, John
Wiley & Sons, New Jersey, NJ, USA, 2010.
[59] G. Taylor, “Disintegration of water drops in an electric field,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A, vol. 280, pp. 383–
397, 1964.
[60] M. S. Wilm and M. Mann, “Electrospray and Taylor-Cone
theory, Dole’s beam of macromolecules at last?” International
Journal of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes, vol. 136, no.
2-3, pp. 167–180, 1994.
[61] J. Fernandez De La Mora, “Electrospray ionization of large
multiply charged species proceeds via Dole’s charged residue
mechanism,” Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 406, no. 1, pp. 93–
104, 2000.
[62] L. Rayleigh, “On the equilibrium of liquid conducting masses
charged with electricity,” Philosophical Magazine, pp. 184–
186, 1882.
[63] J. V. Iribarne and B. A. Thomson, “On the evaporation of
small ions from charged droplets,” The Journal of Chemical
Physics, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 2287–2294, 1976.
[64] A. Gomez and K. Tang, “Charge and fission of droplets in
electrostatic sprays,” Physics of Fluids, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 404–
414, 1994.
[65] D. B. Hager, N. J. Dovichi, J. Klassen, and P. Kebarle, “Droplet
electrospray mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol.
66, no. 22, pp. 3944–3949, 1994.
[66] D. Duft, T. Achtzehn, R. Müller, B. A. Huber, and T. Leisner,
“Coulomb fission: rayleigh jets from levitated microdroplets,” Nature, vol. 421, no. 6919, p. 128, 2003.
[67] M. G. Ikonomou, A. T. Blades, and P. Kebarle, “Investigations
of the electrospray interface for liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 957–
967, 1990.
[68] G. Schmelzeisen-Redeker, L. Bütfering, and F. W. Röllgen,
“Desolvation of ions and molecules in thermospray mass
spectrometry,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry
and Ion Processes, vol. 90, no. 2, pp. 139–150, 1989.
[69] S. Nguyen and J. B. Fenn, “Gas-phase ions of solute species
from charged droplets of solutions,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol.
104, no. 4, pp. 1111–1117, 2007.
[70] B. E. Winger, K. J. Light-Wahl, R. R. Ogorzalek Loo, H. R.
Udseth, and R. D. Smith, “Observation and implications of
high mass-to-charge ratio ions from electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry,” Journal of the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 536–545, 1993.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[71] L. P. Tolić, G. A. Anderson, R. D. Smith, H. M. Brothers, R.
Spindler, and D. A. Tomalia, “Electrospray ionization Fourier
transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometric characterization of high molecular mass Starburst dendrimers,”
International Journal of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes,
vol. 165-166, pp. 405–418, 1997.
[72] S. J. Valentine, J. G. Anderson, A. D. Ellington, and D. E.
Clemmer, “Disulfide-intact and-reduced lysozyme in the gas
phase: conformations and pathways of folding and unfolding,” Journal of Physical Chemistry B, vol. 101, no. 19, pp.
3891–3900, 1997.
[73] B. A. Thomson and J. V. Iribarne, “Field induced ion
evaporation from liquid surfaces at atmospheric pressure,”
The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 71, no. 11, pp. 4451–
4463, 1979.
[74] P. Kebarle, “A brief overview of the present status of the
mechanisms involved in electrospray mass spectrometry,”
Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 804–817,
2000.
[75] Z. Olumee, J. H. Callahan, and A. Vertes, “Droplet dynamics
changes in electrostatic sprays of methanol—Water mixtures,” Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol. 102, no. 46, pp.
9154–9160, 1998.
[76] I. A. Kaltashov and R. R. Abzalimov, “Do ionic charges in ESI
MS provide useful information on macromolecular structure?” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 1239–1246, 2008.
[77] I. A. Kaltashov and A. Mohimen, “Estimates of protein surface areas in solution by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 77, no. 16, pp. 5370–
5379, 2005.
[78] H. Prakash and S. Mazumdar, “Direct correlation of the
crystal structure of proteins with the maximum positive and
negative charge states of gaseous protein ions produced by
electrospray ionization,” Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 1409–1421, 2005.
[79] R. Grandori, “Origin of the conformation dependence of
protein charge-state distributions in electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 38, no.
1, pp. 11–15, 2003.
[80] L. Konermann and D. J. Douglas, “Acid-induced unfolding
of cytochrome c at diﬀerent methanol concentrations: electrospray ionization mass spectrometry specifically monitors
changes in the tertiary structure,” Biochemistry, vol. 36, no.
40, pp. 12296–12302, 1997.
[81] L. Konermann and D. J. Douglas, “Unfolding of proteins
monitored by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: a
comparison of positive and negative ion modes,” Journal of
the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 9, no. 12, pp.
1248–1254, 1998.
[82] A. K. Frimpong, R. R. Abzalimov, S. J. Eyles, and I. A.
Kaltashov, “Gas-phase interference-free analysis of protein
ion charge-state distributions: detection of small-scale conformational transitions accompanying pepsin inactivation,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 79, no. 11, pp. 4154–4161, 2007.
[83] V. J. Nesatyy, “On the conformation-dependent neutralization theory and charging of individual proteins and their
non-covalent complexes in the gas phase,” Journal of Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 93–97, 2004.
[84] R. Grandori, “Origin of the conformation dependence of
protein charge-state distributions in electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 38, no.
1, pp. 11–15, 2003.

33
[85] U. H. Verkerk, M. Peschke, and P. Kebarle, “Eﬀect of buﬀer
cations and of H3 O+ on the charge states of native proteins.
Significance to determinations of stability constants of protein complexes,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 38, no. 6,
pp. 618–631, 2003.
[86] R. R. Julian, R. Hodyss, and J. L. Beauchamp, “Salt bridge
stabilization of charged zwitterionic arginine aggregates in
the gas phase,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol.
123, no. 15, pp. 3577–3583, 2001.
[87] P. D. Schnier, D. S. Gross, and E. R. Williams, “On the maximum charge state and proton transfer reactivity of peptide
and protein ions formed by electrospray ionization,” Journal
of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 6, no. 11,
pp. 1086–1097, 1995.
[88] J. R. Chapman, Mass Spectrometry of Protein and Peptides,
Humana Press, New Jersey, NJ, USA, 2000.
[89] T. B. McMahon and G. Ohanessian, “An experimental and
ab initio study of the nature of the binding in gas-phase
complexes of sodium ions,” Chemistry A, vol. 6, no. 16, pp.
2931–2941, 2000.
[90] S. Hoyau, K. Norrman, T. B. McMahon, and G. Ohanessian,
“A quantitative basis for a scale of Na+ aﬃnities of organic
and small biological molecules in the gas phase,” Journal of
the American Chemical Society, vol. 121, no. 38, pp. 8864–
8875, 1999.
[91] U. H. Verkerk and P. Kebarle, “Ion-ion and ion-molecule
reactions at the surface of proteins produced by nanospray.
Information on the number of acidic residues and control of
the number of ionized acidic and basic residues,” Journal of
the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 16, no. 8, pp.
1325–1341, 2005.
[92] H. Prakash, B. T. Kansara, and S. Mazumdar, “Eﬀects of salts
on the charge-state distribution and the structural basis of
the most-intense charge-state of the gaseous protein ions
produced by electrospray ionization,” International Journal of
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 289, no. 2-3, pp. 84–91, 2010.
[93] N. Felitsyn, M. Peschke, and P. Kebarle, “Origin and number
of charges observed on multiply-protonated native proteins
produced by ESI,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 219, no. 1, pp. 39–62, 2002.
[94] M. Peschke, A. Blades, and P. Kebarle, “Charged states of
proteins. Reactions of doubly protonated alkyldiamines with
NH3 : solvation or deprotonation. Extension of two proton
cases to multiply protonated globular proteins observed in
the gas phase,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol.
124, no. 38, pp. 11519–11530, 2002.
[95] W. Z. Shou and W. Naidong, “Simple means to alleviate
sensitivity loss by trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) mobile phases
in the hydrophilic interaction chromatography-electrospray
tandem mass spectrometric (HILIC-ESI/MS/MS) bioanalysis
of basic compounds,” Journal of Chromatography B, vol. 825,
no. 2, pp. 186–192, 2005.
[96] A. T. Iavarone, J. C. Jurchen, and E. R. Williams, “Eﬀects of
solvent on the maximum charge state and charge state distribution of protein ions produced by electrospray ionization,”
Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 11,
no. 11, pp. 976–985, 2000.
[97] R. R. Ogorzalek Loo, B. E. Winger, and R. D. Smith, “Proton
transfer reaction studies of multiply charged proteins in a
high mass-to-charge ratio quadrupole mass spectrometer,”
Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 5,
no. 12, pp. 1064–1071, 1994.

34
[98] B. E. Winger, K. J. Light-Wahl, and S. Richard, “Gas-phase
proton transfer reactions involving multiply charged cytochrome c ions and water under thermal conditions,” Journal
of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 3, no. 6,
pp. 624–630, 1992.
[99] J. D. Carbeck, J. C. Severs, J. Gao, Q. Wu, R. D. Smith, and G.
M. Whitesides, “Correlation between the charge of proteins
in solution and in the gas phase investigated by protein
charge ladders, capillary electrophoresis, and electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry,” Journal of Physical Chemistry
B, vol. 102, no. 51, pp. 10596–10601, 1998.
[100] A. T. Iavarone and E. R. Williams, “Mechanism of charging
and supercharging molecules in electrospray ionization,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 125, no. 8, pp.
2319–2327, 2003.
[101] A. T. Iavarone, J. C. Jurchen, and E. R. Williams, “Supercharged protein and peptide ions formed by electrospray ionization,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 1455–1460,
2001.
[102] J. A. Loo, R. R. Loo, H. R. Udseth, C. G. Edmonds, and
R. D. Smith, “Solvent-induced conformational changes of
polypeptides probed by electrospray-ionization mass spectrometry,” Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol.
5, no. 3, pp. 101–105, 1991.
[103] R. B. Cole and A. K. Harrata, “Solvent eﬀect on analyte charge
state, signal intensity, and stability in negative ion electrospray mass spectrometry; implications for the mechanism of
negative ion formation,” Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 4, pp. 546–556, 1993.
[104] H. J. Sterling and E. R. Williams, “Origin of supercharging
in electrospray ionization of noncovalent complexes from
aqueous solution,” Journal of the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1933–1943, 2009.
[105] H. J. Sterling, M. P. Daly, G. K. Feld et al., “Eﬀects of supercharging reagents on noncovalent complex structure in electrospray ionization from aqueous solutions,” Journal of the
American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 21, no. 10, pp.
1762–1774, 2010.
[106] S. H. Lomeli, I. X. Peng, S. Yin, R. R. Ogorzalek Loo, and J.
A. Loo, “New reagents for increasing ESI multiple charging
of proteins and protein complexes,” Journal of the American
Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 127–131,
2010.
[107] D. F. Hunt, J. R. Yates III, and J. Shabanowitz, “Protein sequencing by tandem mass spectrometry,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol.
83, no. 17, pp. 6233–6237, 1986.
[108] J. A. Loo, J. P. Quinn, S. I. Ryu, K. D. Henry, M. W. Senko,
and F. W. McLaﬀerty, “High-resolution tandem mass spectrometry of large biomolecules,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 89,
no. 1, pp. 286–289, 1992.
[109] A. T. Iavarone and E. R. Williams, “Collisionally activated
dissociation of supercharged proteins formed by electrospray
ionization,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 75, no. 17, pp. 4525–
4533, 2003.
[110] X. Han, M. Jin, K. Breuker, and F. W. McLaﬀerty, “Extending
top-down mass spectrometry to proteins with masses great
than 200 kilodaltons,” Science, vol. 314, no. 5796, pp. 109–
112, 2006.
[111] S. A. McLuckey and J. L. Stephenson, “Ion/ion chemistry
of high-mass multiply charged ions,” Mass Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 369–407, 1998.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[112] S. J. Pitteri and S. A. McLuckey, “Recent developments in the
ion/ion chemistry of high-mass multiply charged ions,” Mass
Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 931–958, 2005.
[113] E. R. Williams, “Proton transfer reactivity of large multiply
charged ions,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 31, no. 8,
pp. 831–842, 1996.
[114] A. Kharlamova and S. A. McLuckey, “Negative electrospray
droplet exposure to gaseous bases for the manipulation of
protein charge state distributions,” Analytical Chemistry, vol.
83, no. 1, pp. 431–437, 2011.
[115] A. Kharlamova, B. M. Prentice, T. Y. Huang, and S. A.
McLuckey, “Electrospray droplet exposure to gaseous acids
for the manipulation of protein charge state distributions,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 82, no. 17, pp. 7422–7429, 2010.
[116] C. J. Krusemark, B. L. Frey, P. J. Belshaw, and L. M.
Smith, “Modifying the charge state distribution of proteins in
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry by chemical derivatization,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1617–1625, 2009.
[117] B. L. Frey, C. J. Krusemark, A. R. Ledvina, J. J. Coon, P. J.
Belshaw, and L. M. Smith, “Ion-ion reactions with fixedcharge modified proteins to produce ions in a single, very
high charge state,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 276, no. 2-3, pp. 136–143, 2008.
[118] L. Tang and P. Kebarle, “Dependence of ion intensity in
electrospray mass spectrometry on the concentration of the
analytes in the electrosprayed solution,” Analytical Chemistry,
vol. 65, no. 24, pp. 3654–3667, 1993.
[119] G. Wang and R. B. Cole, “Mechanistic interpretation of the
dependence of charge state distributions on analyte concentrations in electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 67, no. 17, pp. 2892–2900, 1995.
[120] L. Tang and P. Kebarle, “Eﬀect of the conductivity of the
electrosprayed solution on the electrospray current. Factors
determining analyte sensitivity in electrospray mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 63, no. 23, pp. 2709–2715,
1991.
[121] C. G. Enke, “A predictive model for matrix and analyte eﬀects
in electrospray ionization of singly-charged ionic analytes,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 69, no. 23, pp. 4885–4893, 1997.
[122] T. L. Constantopoulos, G. S. Jackson, and C. G. Enke, “Eﬀects
of salt concentration on analyte response using electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 625–634,
1999.
[123] Y. Li and R. B. Cole, “Shifts in peptide and protein charge
state distributions with varying spray tip orifice diameter in
nanoelectrospray fourier transform ion cycltron resonance
mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 75, no. 21, pp.
5739–5746, 2003.
[124] W. M. A. Niessen, “State-of-the-art in liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry,” Journal of Chromatography A,
vol. 856, pp. 179–197, 1999.
[125] R. D. Voyksner and H. Lee, “Improvements in LC/electrospray ion trap mass spectrometry performance using an oﬀaxis nebulizer,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 71, no. 7, pp. 1441–
1447, 1999.
[126] V. Gabelica, E. De Pauw, and M. Karas, “Influence of the
capillary temperature and the source pressure on the internal
energy distribution of electrosprayed ions,” International
Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 231, no. 2-3, pp. 189–195,
2004.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[127] M. Busman, A. L. Rockwood, and R. D. Smith, “Activation
energies for gas-phase dissociations of multiply charged ions
from electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,” Journal of
Physical Chemistry, vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 2397–2400, 1992.
[128] M. J. Van Stipdonk, M. P. Ince, B. A. Perera, and J. A.
Martin, “Cluster ions derived from sodium and potassium
tetrafluoroborate and their collision induced dissociation in
an ion trap mass spectrometer,” Rapid Communications in
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 355–363, 2002.
[129] R. D. Smith, J. A. Loo, C. J. Barinaga, C. G. Edmonds,
and H. R. Udseth, “Collisional activation and collisionactivated dissociation of large multiply charged polypeptides
and proteins produced by electrospray ionization,” Journal of
the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
53–65, 1990.
[130] B. A. Thomson, “Declustering and fragmentation of protein
ions from an electrospray ion source,” Journal of the American
Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 1053–1058,
1997.
[131] D. S. Ashton, C. R. Beddell, D. J. Cooper, B. N. Green,
and R. W. A. Oliver, “Mechanism of production of ions in
electrospray mass spectrometry,” Organic Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 28, pp. 721–728, 1993.
[132] R. D. Smith, K. J. Light-Wahl, B. E. Winger, and J. A. Loo,
“Preservation of non-covalent associations in electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry: multiply charged polypeptide
and protein dimers,” Organic Mass Spectrometry, vol. 27, pp.
811–821, 1992.
[133] G. J. Van Berkel, F. Zhou, and J. T. Aronson, “Changes in
bulk solution pH caused by the inherent controlled-current
electrolytic process of an electrospray ion source,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes, vol. 162,
no. 1–3, pp. 55–67, 1997.
[134] S. Zhou, A. G. Edwards, K. D. Cook, and G. J. Van Berkel,
“Investigation of the electrospray plume by laser-induced
fluorescence spectroscopy,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 71, no.
4, pp. 769–776, 1999.
[135] C. L. Gatlin and F. Tureček, “Acidity determination in droplets formed by electrospraying methanol-water solutions,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 712–718, 1994.
[136] S. E. Rodriguez-Cruz, J. T. Khoury, and J. H. Parks, “Protein
fluorescence measurements within electrospray droplets,”
Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 12,
no. 6, pp. 716–725, 2001.
[137] K. Breuker and F. W. McLaﬀerty, “Stepwise evolution of
protein native structure with electrospray into the gas phase,
10−12 to 102 s,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, vol. 105, no. 47, pp. 18145–
18152, 2008.
[138] T. D. Wood, R. A. Chorush, F. M. Wampler, D. P. Little,
P. B. O’Connor, and F. W. McLaﬀerty, “Gas-phase folding
and unfolding of cytochrome c cations,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
vol. 92, no. 7, pp. 2451–2454, 1995.
[139] S. Banerjee, H. Prakash, and S. Mazumdar, “Evidence of
molecular fragmentation inside the charged droplets produced by electrospray process,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 1707–1717,
2011.
[140] A. M. Gañán-Calvo, “The surface charge in electrospraying:
its nature and its universal scaling laws,” Journal of Aerosol
Science, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 863–872, 1999.
[141] Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford University Press, 2nd
edition, 1989.

35
[142] F. W. McLaﬀerty, Tandem Mass Spectrometry, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, NY, USA, 1983.
[143] S. A. McLuckey, “Principles of collisional activation in analytical mass spectrometry,” Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 599–614, 1992.
[144] A. L. McCormack, J. L. Jones, and V. H. Wysocki, “Surfaceinduced dissociation of multiply protonated peptides,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 3, no.
8, pp. 859–862, 1992.
[145] R. A. Chorush, D. P. Little, S. C. Beu, T. D. Wood, and F.
W. McLaﬀerty, “Surface-induced dissociation of multiplyprotonated proteins,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 67, no. 6, pp.
1042–1046, 1995.
[146] D. P. Little, J. P. Speir, M. W. Senko, P. B. O’Connor,
and F. W. McLaﬀerty, “Infrared multiphoton dissociation
of large multiply charged ions for biomolecule sequencing,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 66, no. 18, pp. 2809–2815, 1994.
[147] W. D. Price, P. D. Schnier, and E. R. Williams, “Tandem
mass spectrometry of large biomolecule ions by blackbody
infrared radiative dissociation,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 68,
no. 5, pp. 859–866, 1996.
[148] R. C. Dunbar and T. B. McMahon, “Activation of unimolecular reactions by ambient blackbody radiation,” Science, vol.
279, no. 5348, pp. 194–197, 1998.
[149] M. S. Thompson, W. Cui, and J. P. Reilly, “Fragmentation
of singly charged peptide ions by photodissociation at λ =
157 nm,” Angewandte Chemie, vol. 43, no. 36, pp. 4791–4794,
2004.
[150] Z. Guan, N. L. Kelleher, P. B. O’Connor, D. J. Aaserud, D. P.
Little, and F. W. McLaﬀerty, “193 nm photodissociation of
larger multiply-charged biomolecules,” International Journal
of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes, vol. 157-158, pp. 357–
364, 1996.
[151] R. A. Zubarev, N. L. Kelleher, and F. W. McLaﬀerty, “Electron
capture dissociation of multiply charged protein cations. A
nonergodic process,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 120, no. 13, pp. 3265–3266, 1998.
[152] J. E. P. Syka, J. J. Coon, M. J. Schroeder, J. Shabanowitz, and D.
F. Hunt, “Peptide and protein sequence analysis by electron
transfer dissociation mass spectrometry,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
vol. 101, no. 26, pp. 9528–9533, 2004.
[153] B. A. Budnik, K. F. Haselmann, and R. A. Zubarev, “Electron
detachment dissociation of peptide di-anions: an electronhole recombination phenomenon,” Chemical Physics Letters,
vol. 342, no. 3-4, pp. 299–302, 2001.
[154] R. B. Cody, “Electron impact excitation of ions from organics: an alternative to collision induced dissociation,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 547–551, 1979.
[155] R. W. Vachet and G. L. Glish, “Eﬀects of heavy gases on the
tandem mass spectra of peptide ions in the quadrupole ion
trap,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 1194–1202, 1996.
[156] R. Boyd and A. Somogyi, “The mobile proton hypothesis in
fragmentation of protonated peptides: a perspective,” Journal
of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 21, pp.
1275–1278, 2010.
[157] X. J. Tang, P. Thibault, and R. K. Boyd, “Fragmentation
reactions of multiply-protonated peptides and implications
for sequencing by tandem mass spectrometry with lowenergy collision-induced dissociation,” Analytical Chemistry,
vol. 65, no. 20, pp. 2824–2834, 1993.

36
[158] R. S. Bordoli and R. H. Bateman, “The eﬀect of collision
energy, target gas and target gas purity on the high energy
collision induced product ion spectrum of renin substrate,”
International Journal of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes,
vol. 122, pp. 243–254, 1992.
[159] W. J. Griﬃths, A. P. Jonsson, S. Liu, D. K. Rai, and Y. Wang,
“Electrospray and tandem mass spectrometry in biochemistry,” Biochemical Journal, vol. 355, no. 3, pp. 545–561, 2001.
[160] M. Kinter and N. E. Sherman, Protein Sequencing and Identification Using Tandem Mass Spectrometry, Wiley-Interscience,
New York, NY, USA, 2000.
[161] V. H. Wysocki, G. Cheng, Q. Zhang, K. A. Herrmann, R.
L. Beardsley, and A. E. Hilderbrand, in Principles of Mass
Spectrometry Applied to Biomolecules, pp. 277–300, John
Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[162] M. L. Gross, “Charge-remote fragmentations: method,
mechanism and applications,” International Journal of Mass
Spectrometry and Ion Processes, vol. 118-119, pp. 137–165,
1992.
[163] K. Biemann and A. M. James, in Methods in Enzymology, vol.
193, pp. 455–479, Academic Press, 1990.
[164] B. Paizs and S. Suhai, “Towards understanding the tandem
mass spectra of protonated oligopeptides. 1: mechanism of
amide bond cleavage,” Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 103–113, 2004.
[165] H. H. Hill, C. H. Hill, G. R. Asbury, C. Wu, L. M. Matz, and T.
Ichiye, “Charge location on gas phase peptides,” International
Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 219, no. 1, pp. 23–37, 2002.
[166] C. Afonso, F. Modeste, P. Breton, F. Fournier, and J. C. Tabet,
“Proton aﬃnities of the commonly occuring L-amino acids
by using electrospray ionization-ion trap mass spectrometry,” European Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 6, no. 5, pp.
443–449, 2000.
[167] C. Bleiholder, S. Suhai, and B. Paizs, “Revising the proton
aﬃnity scale of the naturally occurring α-amino acids,”
Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 17,
no. 9, pp. 1275–1281, 2006.
[168] V. H. Wysocki, G. Tsaprailis, L. L. Smith, and L. A. Breci,
“Mobile and localized protons: a framework for understanding peptide dissociation,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol.
35, no. 12, pp. 1399–1406, 2000.
[169] A. R. Dongre, J. L. Jones, A. Somogyi, and V. H. Wysocki,
“Influence of peptide composition, gas-phase basicity, and
chemical modification on fragmentation eﬃciency: evidence
for the mobile proton model,” Journal of the American
Chemical Society, vol. 118, no. 35, pp. 8365–8374, 1996.
[170] A. G. Harrison and T. Yalcin, “Proton mobility in protonated
amino acids and peptides,” International Journal of Mass
Spectrometry and Ion Processes, vol. 165-166, pp. 339–347,
1997.
[171] I. P. Csonka, B. Paizs, G. Lendvay, and S. Suhai, “Proton
mobility in protonated peptides: a joint molecular orbital
and RRKM study,” Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 417–431, 2000.
[172] B. Paizs and S. Suhai, “Theoretical study of the main
fragmentation pathways for protonated glycylglycine,” Rapid
Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 15, no. 8, pp.
651–663, 2001.
[173] B. Palzs and S. Suhal, “Fragmentation pathways of protonated peptides,” Mass Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 24, no. 4,
pp. 508–548, 2005.
[174] P. Roepstorﬀ and J. Fohlman, “Proposal for a common
nomenclature for sequence ions in mass spectra of peptides,”
Biomedical Mass Spectrometry, vol. 11, no. 11, p. 601, 1984.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[175] K. Biemann, “Contributions of mass spectrometry to peptide
and protein structure,” Biomedical and Environmental Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 16, no. 1–12, pp. 99–111, 1988.
[176] K. D. Ballard and S. J. Gaskell, “Sequential mass spectrometry
applied to the study of the formation of “internal” fragment
ions of protonated peptides,” International Journal of Mass
Spectrometry and Ion Processes, vol. 111, no. C, pp. 173–189,
1991.
[177] K. Ambihapathy, T. Yalcin, H. W. Leung, and A. G. Harrison,
“Pathways to immonium ions in the fragmentation of protonated peptides,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 32, no.
2, pp. 209–215, 1997.
[178] S. Sun, C. Yu, Y. Qiao et al., “Deriving the probabilities of
water loss and ammonia loss for amino acids from tandem
mass spectra,” Journal of Proteome Research, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.
202–208, 2008.
[179] J. E. McClellan, S. T. Quarmby, and R. A. Yost, “Parent and
neutral loss monitoring on a quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer: screening of acylcarnitines in complex mixtures,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 74, no. 22, pp. 5799–5806, 2002.
[180] A. G. Harrison, A. B. Young, C. Bleiholder, S. Suhai, and
B. Paizs, “Scrambling of sequence information in collisioninduced dissociation of peptides,” Journal of the American
Chemical Society, vol. 128, no. 32, pp. 10364–10365, 2006.
[181] A. G. Harrison and A. B. Young, “Fragmentation of protonated oligoalanines: amide bond cleavage and beyond,”
Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 15,
no. 12, pp. 1810–1819, 2004.
[182] T. Yalcin, C. Khouw, I. G. Csizmadia, M. R. Peterson, and
A. G. Harrison, “Why are B ions stable species in peptide spectra?” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 6, no. 12, pp. 1165–1174, 1995.
[183] H. Nair, A. Somogyi, and V. H. Wysocki, “Eﬀect of alkyl
substitution at the amide nitrogen on amide bond cleavage:
electrospray ionization/surface-induced dissociation fragmentation of substance P and two alkylated analogs,” Journal
of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 1141–1148, 1996.
[184] R. W. Vachet, B. M. Bishop, B. W. Erickson, and G. L.
Glish, “Novel peptide dissociation: gas-phase intramolecular
rearrangement of internal amino acid residues,” Journal of the
American Chemical Society, vol. 119, no. 24, pp. 5481–5488,
1997.
[185] J. V. Olsen and M. Mann, “Improved peptide identification in
proteomics by two consecutive stages of mass spectrometric
fragmentation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 101, no. 37, pp.
13417–13422, 2004.
[186] Tang Xue Jun and R. K. Boyd, “Rearrangements of doubly
charged acylium ions from lysyl and ornithyl peptides,” Rapid
Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 678–
686, 1994.
[187] J. Yaqüe, A. Paradela, M. Ramos et al., “Peptide rearrangement during quadrupole ion trap fragmentation: added
complexity to MS/MS spectra,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 75,
no. 6, pp. 1524–1535, 2003.
[188] C. Bleiholder, S. Osburn, T. D. Williams et al., “Sequencescrambling fragmentation pathways of protonated peptides,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 130, no. 52, pp.
17774–17789, 2008.
[189] C. Jia, W. Qi, and Z. He, “Cyclization reaction of peptide fragment Ions during multistage collisionally activated
decomposition: an inducement to lose internal amino-acid
residues,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 663–678, 2007.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[190] A. G. Harrison, “Peptide sequence scrambling through cyclization of b5 Ions,” Journal of the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 1776–1780, 2008.
[191] S. Molesworth, S. Osburn, and M. Van Stipdonk, “Influence
of amino acid side chains on apparent selective opening
of cyclic b5 ions,” Journal of the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1028–1036, 2010.
[192] L. Mouls, J. L. Aubagnac, J. Martinez, and C. Enjalbal, “Low
energy peptide fragmentations in an ESI-Q-Tof type mass
spectrometer,” Journal of Proteome Research, vol. 6, no. 4, pp.
1378–1391, 2007.
[193] L. Yu, Y. Tan, Y. Tsai, D. R. Goodlett, and N. C. Polfer, “On
the relevance of peptide sequence permutations in shotgun
proteomics studies,” Journal of Proteome Research, vol. 10, no.
5, pp. 2409–2416, 2011.
[194] A. A. Goloborodko, M. V. Gorshkov, D. M. Good, and R.
A. Zubarev, “Sequence scrambling in shotgun proteomics is
negligible,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 1121–1124, 2011.
[195] D. Pu and C. J. Cassady, “Negative ion dissociation of peptides containing hydroxyl side chains,” Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 91–100, 2008.
[196] J. H. Bowie, C. S. Brinkworth, and S. Dua, “Collisioninduced fragmentations of the (M-H)-parent anions of underivatized peptides: an aid to structure determination and
some unusual negative ion cleavages,” Mass Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 87–107, 2002.
[197] A. G. Harrison and A. B. Young, “Fragmentation of deprotonated N-benzoylpeptides: formation of deprotonated oxazolones,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 446–456, 2004.
[198] N. L. Clipston, J. Jai-nhuknan, and C. J. Cassady, “A comparison of negative and positive ion time-of-flight postsource decay mass spectrometry for peptides containing basic
residues,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol.
222, no. 1–3, pp. 363–381, 2003.
[199] A. L. McCormack, A. Somogyi, A. R. Dongre, and V. H.
Wysocki, “Fragmentation of protonated peptides: surfaceinduced dissociation in conjunction with a quantum mechanical approach,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 65, no. 20, pp.
2859–2872, 1993.
[200] G. E. Reid, R. J. Simpson, and R. A. J. O’Hair, “Leaving group
and gas phase neighboring group eﬀects in the side chain
losses from protonated serine and its derivatives,” Journal of
the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 11, no. 12,
pp. 1047–1060, 2000.
[201] R. J. Ferrier, Carbohydrate Chemistry, vol. 33, Royal Society
of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK, 2002.
[202] B. Domon and C. E. Costello, “A systematic nomenclature
for carbohydrate fragmentations in FAB-MS/MS spectra of
glycoconjugates,” Glycoconjugate Journal, vol. 5, no. 4, pp.
397–409, 1988.
[203] J. Lemoine, B. Fournet, D. Despeyroux, K. R. Jennings,
R. Rosenberg, and E. de Hoﬀmann, “Collision-induced
dissociation of alkali metal cationized and permethylated
oligosaccharides: influence of the collision energy and of the
collision gas for the assignment of linkage position,” Journal
of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 4, no. 3,
pp. 197–203, 1993.
[204] D. J. Harvey, “Collision-induced fragmentation of underivatized N-linked carbohydrates ionized by electrospray,”
Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 1178–1190,
2000.

37
[205] A. Pfenninger, M. Karas, B. Finke, and B. Stahl, “Structural
analysis of underivatized neutral human milk oligosaccharides in the negative ion mode by nano-electrospray MSn
(Part 1: methodology),” Journal of the American Society for
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 1331–1340, 2002.
[206] W. Chai, V. Piskarev, and A. M. Lawson, “Negative-ion electrospray mass spectrometry of neutral underivatized oligosaccharides,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 651–
657, 2001.
[207] D. Garozzo, M. Giuﬀrida, G. Impallomeni, A. Ballistreri,
and G. Mon taudo, “Determination of linkage position and
identification of the reducing end in linear oligosaccharides
by negative ion fast atom bombardment mass spectrometry,”
Analytical Chemistry, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 279–286, 1990.
[208] S. A. McLuckey, G. J. Van Berker, and G. L. Glish, “Tandem mass spectrometry of small, multiply charged oligonucleotides,” Journal of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 60–70, 1992.
[209] E. Nordhoﬀ, M. Karas, R. Cramer et al., “Direct mass spectrometric sequencing of low-picomole amounts of oligodeoxynucleotides with up to 21 bases by matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization mass spectrometry,” Journal of Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 99–112, 1995.
[210] J. P. Barry, P. Vouros, A. Van Schepdael, and S. J. Law, “Mass
and sequence verification of modified oligonucleotides using
electrospray tandem mass spectrometry,” Journal of Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 993–1006, 1995.
[211] M. G. Bartlett, J. A. McCloskey, S. Manalili, and R. H. Griﬀey,
“The eﬀect of backbone charge on the collision-induced dissociation of oligonucleotides,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1277–1283, 1996.
[212] S. A. McLuckey and S. Habibi-Goudarzi, “Decompositions
of multiply charged oligonucleotide anions,” Journal of the
American Chemical Society, vol. 115, no. 25, pp. 12085–
12095, 1993.
[213] R. L. Hettich and E. A. Stemmler, “Investigation of oligonucleotide fragmentation with matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization fourier-transform mass spectrometry and sustained oﬀ-resonance irradiation,” Rapid Communications in
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 321–327, 1996.
[214] W. J. Griﬃths, Y. Yang, J. Å. Lindgren, and J. Sjövall,
“Charge remote fragmentation of fatty acid anions in 400 eV
collisions with xenon atoms,” Rapid Communications in Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1996.
[215] E. Fahy, S. Subramaniam, H. A. Brown et al., “A comprehensive classification system for lipids,” Journal of Lipid Research,
vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 839–861, 2005.
[216] K. B. Tomer, F. W. Crow, and M. L. Gross, “Location of
double bond position in unsaturated fatty acids by negative
ion MS/MS,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol.
105, no. 16, pp. 5487–5488, 1983.
[217] W. J. Griﬃths, “Tandem mass spectrometry in the study
of fatty acids, bile acids, and steroids,” Mass Spectrometry
Reviews, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 81–152, 2003.
[218] V. H. Wysocki and M. M. Ross, “Charge-remote fragmentation of gas-phase ions: mechanistic and energetic considerations in the dissociation of long-chain functionalized alkanes
and alkenes,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry and
Ion Processes, vol. 104, no. 3, pp. 179–211, 1991.
[219] W. J. Griﬃths, A. Brown, R. Reimendal, Y. Yang, J. Zhang,
and J. Sjövall, “A comparison of fast-atom bombardment
and electrospray as methods of ionization in the study of

38

[220]

[221]
[222]

[223]

[224]

[225]

[226]

[227]

[228]

[229]
[230]

[231]

[232]

[233]
[234]

[235]

[236]

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
sulphated- and sulphonated-lipids by tandem mass spectrometry,” Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol.
10, no. 10, pp. 1169–1174, 1996.
P. Roepstorﬀ, “Mass spectrometry in protein studies from
genome to function,” Current Opinion in Biotechnology, vol.
8, no. 1, pp. 6–13, 1997.
J. R. Yates, “Mass spectrometry and the age of the proteome,”
Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 1998.
D. J. C. Pappin, P. Hojrup, and A. J. Bleasby, “Rapid identification of proteins by peptide-mass fingerprinting,” Current
Biology, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 327–332, 1993.
B. M. Mayr, O. Kohlbacher, K. Reinert et al., “Absolute myoglobin quantitation in serum by combining twodimensional liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry and novel data analysis algorithms,”
Journal of Proteome Research, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 414–421, 2006.
Y. Oda, K. Huang, F. R. Cross, D. Cowburn, and B. T. Chait,
“Accurate quantitation of protein expression and site-specific
phosphorylation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 96, no. 12, pp.
6591–6596, 1999.
J. A. Loo, “Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: a
technology for studying noncovalent macromolecular complexes,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 200,
no. 1–3, pp. 175–186, 2000.
E. T. J. Van den Bremer, W. Jiskoot, R. James et al., “Probing
metal ion binding and conformational properties of the
colicin E9 endonuclease by electrospray ionization time-offlight mass spectrometry,” Protein Science, vol. 11, no. 7, pp.
1738–1752, 2002.
S. K. Chowdhury, V. Katta, and B. T. Chait, “Probing conformational changes in proteins by mass spectrometry,” Journal
of the American Chemical Society, vol. 112, no. 24, pp. 9012–
9013, 1990.
J. S. Andersen, B. Svensson, and P. Roepstorﬀ, “Electrospray
ionization and matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization
mass spectrometry: powerful analytical tools in recombinant
protein chemistry,” Nature Biotechnology, vol. 14, no. 4, pp.
449–457, 1996.
H. D. Niall and S. N. T. C. H. W. Hirs, in Methods in Enzymology, vol. 27, pp. 942–1010, Academic Press, 1973.
J. A. Loo, C. G. Edmonds, and R. D. Smith, “Primary sequence information from intact proteins by electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry,” Science, vol. 248, no. 4952,
pp. 201–204, 1990.
K. Biemann, “Sequencing of peptides by tandem mass spectrometry and high-energy collision-induced dissociation,”
Methods in Enzymology, vol. 193, pp. 455–479, 1990.
J. A. Taylor and R. S. Johnson, “Sequence database searches
via de Novo peptide sequencing by tandem mass spectrometry,” Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, vol. 11,
no. 9, pp. 1067–1075, 1997.
A. Armirotti, “Bottom-up proteomics,” Current Analytical
Chemistry, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 116–130, 2009.
H. Zhong, Y. Zhang, Z. Wen, and L. Li, “Protein sequencing
by mass analysis of polypeptide ladders after controlled
protein hydrolysis,” Nature Biotechnology, vol. 22, no. 10, pp.
1291–1296, 2004.
G. E. Reid and S. A. McLuckey, ““Top down” protein characterization via tandem mass spectrometry,” Journal of Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 663–675, 2002.
M. Mann and O. N. Jensen, “Proteomic analysis of posttranslational modifications,” Nature Biotechnology, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 255–261, 2003.

[237] M. A. Freitas, A. R. Sklenar, and M. R. Parthun, “Application
of mass spectrometry to the identification and quantification
of histone post-translational modifications,” Journal of Cellular Biochemistry, vol. 92, no. 4, pp. 691–700, 2004.
[238] H. Oberacher, C. G. Huber, and P. J. Oefner, “Mutation scanning by ion-pair reversed-phase high-performance liquid
chromatography-electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
(ICEMS),” Human Mutation, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 86–95, 2003.
[239] L. Zhang, E. E. Eugeni, M. R. Parthun, and M. A. Freitas,
“Identification of novel histone post-translational modifications by peptide mass fingerprinting,” Chromosoma, vol. 112,
no. 2, pp. 77–86, 2003.
[240] H. Prakash and S. Mazumdar, “Succinylation of cytochrome
c investigated by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry:
reactive lysine residues,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 281, no. 1-2, pp. 55–62, 2009.
[241] S. Goyal, M. S. Deshpande, and S. Mazumdar, “Structural
design of the active site for covalent attachment of the heme
to the protein matrix: atudies on a thermostable cytochrome
P450,” Biochemistry, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1042–1052, 2011.
[242] T. Y. Yen, H. Yan, and B. A. Macher, “Characterizing closely
spaced, complex disulfide bond patterns in peptides and proteins by liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol.
37, no. 1, pp. 15–30, 2002.
[243] D. L. Smith, Z. Zhou, and A. M. James, in Methods in Enzymology, vol. 193, pp. 1296–1291, Academic Press, 1990.
[244] M. Scigelova, P. S. Green, A. E. Giannakopulos et al., “A practical protocol for the reduction of disulfide bonds in proteins
prior to analysis by mass spectrometry,” European Journal of
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 7, pp. 29–34, 2001.
[245] S. Y. Gauthier, C. M. Kay, B. D. Sykes, V. K. Walker, and P.
L. Davies, “Disulfide bond mapping and structural characterization of spruce budworm antifreeze protein,” European
Journal of Biochemistry, vol. 258, no. 2, pp. 445–453, 1998.
[246] M. Zhang and I. A. Kaltashov, “Mapping of protein disulfide
bonds using negative ion fragmentation with a broadband
precursor selection,” Analytical Chemistry, vol. 78, no. 14, pp.
4820–4829, 2006.
[247] J. Wu, “Disulfide bond mapping by cyanylation-induced
cleavage and mass spectrometry,” Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 446, pp. 1–20, 2008.
[248] R. D. Smith and K. J. Light-Wahl, “The observation of noncovalent interactions in solution by electrospray ionization
mass spectrometry: promise, pitfalls and prognosis,” Biological Mass Spectrometry, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 493–501, 1993.
[249] T. D. Veenstra, “Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry
in the study of biomolecular non-covalent interactions,” Biophysical Chemistry, vol. 79, no. 2, pp. 63–79, 1999.
[250] B. N. Pramanik, P. L. Bartner, U. A. Mirza, Y. H. Liu, and A. K.
Ganguly, “Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry for the
study of non-covalent complexes: an emerging technology,”
Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 33, no. 10, pp. 911–920,
1998.
[251] S. Y. Sheu, D. Y. Yang, H. L. Selzle, and E. W. Schlag,
“Energetics of hydrogen bonds in peptides,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
vol. 100, no. 22, pp. 12683–12687, 2003.
[252] M. F. Jarrold, “Peptides and proteins in the vapor phase,” Annual Review of Physical Chemistry, vol. 51, pp. 179–207, 2000.
[253] S. Banerjee and S. Mazumdarc, “Non-covalent dimers of the
lysine containing protonated peptide ions in gaseous state:
electrospray ionizationmass spectrometric study,” Journal of
Mass Spectrometry, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1212–1219, 2010.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[254] E. N. Kitova, M. Seo, P. N. Roy, and J. S. Klassen, “Elucidating
the intermolecular interactions within a desolvated proteinligand complex. An experimental and computational study,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 130, no. 4, pp.
1214–1226, 2008.
[255] B. Qiu, J. Liu, Z. Qin, G. Wang, and H. Luo, “Quintets of
uracil and thymine: a novel structure of nucleobase selfassembly studied by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,” Chemical Communications, no. 20, pp. 2863–2865, 2009.
[256] J. A. Loo, “Studying noncovalent protein complexes by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,” Mass Spectrometry
Reviews, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 1997.
[257] D. Lafitte, A. J. R. Heck, T. J. Hill, K. Jumel, S. E. Harding,
and P. J. Derrick, “Evidence of noncovalent dimerization of
calmodulin,” European Journal of Biochemistry, vol. 261, no.
1, pp. 337–344, 1999.
[258] J. A. Loo, “Probing protein-metal ion interactions by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: enolase and nucleocapsid protein,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol.
204, no. 1–3, pp. 113–123, 2001.
[259] K. Benkestock, P. O. Edlund, and J. Roeraade, “Electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry as a tool for determination of
drug binding sites to human serum albumin by noncovalent
interaction,” Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry,
vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 1637–1643, 2005.
[260] H. Steen and N. Jensen, “Analysis of protein-nucleic acid
interactions by photochemical cross-linking and mass spectrometry,” Mass Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 163–
182, 2002.
[261] A. Tjernberg, S. Carnö, F. Oliv et al., “Determination of dissociation constants for protein-ligand complexes by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,” Analytical Chemistry,
vol. 76, no. 15, pp. 4325–4331, 2004.
[262] L. Liu, D. Bagal, E. N. Kitova, P. D. Schnier, and J. S. Klassen,
“Hydrophobic protein-ligand interactions preserved in the
gas phase,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 131,
no. 44, pp. 15980–15981, 2009.
[263] N. P. Barrera, N. Di Bartolo, P. J. Booth, and C. V. Robinson,
“Micelles protect membrane complexes from solution to
vacuum,” Science, vol. 321, no. 5886, pp. 243–246, 2008.
[264] M. C. Crowe and J. S. Brodbelt, “Evaluation of noncovalent
interactions between peptides and polyether compounds via
energy-variable collisionally activated dissociation,” Journal
of the American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 14, no. 10,
pp. 1148–1157, 2003.
[265] W. M. David and J. S. Brodbelt, “Threshold dissociation
energies of protonated amine/polyether complexes in a quadrupole ion trap,” Journal of the American Society for Mass
Spectrometry, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 383–392, 2003.
[266] C. S. Ho, C. W. K. Lam, M. H. M. Chan et al., “Electrospray
ionisation mass spectrometry: principles and clinical applications,” Clinical Biochemistry Review, vol. 24, pp. 3–12, 2003.
[267] M. S. Rashed, M. P. Bucknall, D. Little et al., “Screening blood
spots for inborn errors of metabolism by electrospray tandem
mass spectrometry with a microplate batch process and a
computer algorithm for automated flagging of abnormal
profiles,” Clinical Chemistry, vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 1129–1141,
1997.
[268] D. H. Chace, J. E. Sherwin, S. L. Hillman, F. Lorey,
and G. C. Cunningham, “Use of phenylalanine-to-tyrosine
ratio determined by tandem mass spectrometry to improve
newborn screening for phenylketonuria of early discharge
specimens collected in the first 24 hours,” Clinical Chemistry,
vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 2405–2409, 1998.

39
[269] D. H. Chace, J. C. DiPerna, B. L. Mitchell, B. Sgroi, L.
F. Hofman, and E. W. Naylor, “Electrospray tandem mass
spectrometry for analysis of acylcarnitines in dried postmortem blood specimens collected at autopsy from infants
with unexplained cause of death,” Clinical Chemistry, vol. 47,
no. 7, pp. 1166–1182, 2001.
[270] T. Ito, A. B. P. Van Kuilenburg, A. H. Bootsma et al., “Rapid
screening of high-risk patients for disorders of purine and
pyrimidine metabolism using HPLC-electrospray tandem
mass spectrometry of liquid urine or urine-soaked filter
paper strips,” Clinical Chemistry, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 445–452,
2000.
[271] U. G. Jensen, N. J. Brandt, E. Christensen, F. Skovby, B.
Nørgaard-Pedersen, and H. Simonsen, “Neonatal screening
for galactosemia by quantitative analysis of hexose monophosphates using tandem mass spectrometry: a retrospective
study,” Clinical Chemistry, vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1364–1372,
2001.
[272] D. W. Johnson, “A rapid screening procedure for the diagnosis of peroxisomal disorders: quantification of very longchain fatty acids, as dimethylaminoethyl esters, in plasma
and blood spots, by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry,”
Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 475–
486, 2000.
[273] A. H. Bootsma, H. Overmars, A. Van Rooij et al., “Rapid
analysis of conjugated bile acids in plasma using electrospray
tandem mass spectrometry: application for selective screening of peroxisomal disorders,” Journal of Inherited Metabolic
Disease, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 307–310, 1999.
[274] B. J. Wild, B. N. Green, E. K. Cooper et al., “Rapid identification of hemoglobin variants by electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry,” Blood Cells, Molecules, and Diseases, vol. 27,
no. 3, pp. 691–704, 2001.
[275] W. Hoelzel and K. Miedema, “Development of a reference
system for the international standardization of HbA1c/glycohemoglobin determinations,” Journal of the International
Federation of Clinical Chemistry, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 62–67, 1996.
[276] U. Krishnamurti and M. W. Steﬀes, “Glycohemoglobin: a
primary predictor of the development or reversal of complications of diabetes mellitus,” Clinical Chemistry, vol. 47,
no. 7, pp. 1157–1165, 2001.
[277] S. K. Manna, A. D. Patterson, Q. Yang et al., “UPLCMS-based urine metabolomics reveals indole-3-lactic acid
and phenyllactic acid as conserved biomarkers for alcoholinduced liver disease in the Ppara-null mouse model,” Journal
of Proteome Research, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 4120–4133, 2011.
[278] S. K. Manna, A. D. Patterson, Q. Yang et al., “Identification
of noninvasive biomarkers for alcohol-induced liver disease
using urinary metabolomics and the ppara-null mouse,”
Journal of Proteome Research, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 4176–4188,
2010.
[279] C. Lifshitz and J. Laskin, Principles of Mass Spectrometry
Applied to Biomolecules, John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[280] E. Kalenius, D. Moiani, E. Dalcanale, and P. Vainiotalo, “Measuring H-bonding in supramolecular complexes by gas phase
ion-molecule reactions,” Chemical Communications, no. 37,
pp. 3865–3867, 2007.
[281] D. P. Weimann, H. D. F. Winkler, J. A. Falenski, B. Koksch,
and C. A. Schalley, “Highly dynamic motion of crown ethers
along oligolysine peptide chains,” Nature Chemistry, vol. 1,
no. 7, pp. 573–577, 2009.
[282] T. E. Wales and J. R. Engen, “Hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry for the analysis of protein dynamics,” Mass Spectrometry Reviews, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 158–170, 2006.

40
[283] Y. Hamuro, S. J. Coales, M. R. Southern, J. F. Nemeth-Cawley,
D. D. Stranz, and P. R. Griﬃn, “Rapid analysis of protein
structure and dynamics by hydrogen/deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry,” Journal of Biomolecular Techniques, vol.
14, no. 3, pp. 171–182, 2003.
[284] B. E. Winger, K. J. Light-Wahl, A. L. Rockwood, and R. D.
Smith, “Probing qualitative conformation diﬀerences of multiply protonated gas-phase proteins via hydrogen/deuterium
isotopic exchange with water-d2,” Journal of the American
Chemical Society, vol. 114, no. 14, pp. 5897–5898, 1992.
[285] F. Wang, M. A. Freitas, A. G. Marshall, and B. D. Sykes, “Gasphase memory of solution-phase protein conformation: H/D
exchange and Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
mass spectrometry of the N-terminal domain of cardiac
troponin C,” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol.
192, no. 1–3, pp. 319–325, 1999.
[286] H. Han and S. A. McLuckey, “Selective covalent bond
formation in polypeptide ions via gas-phase ion/ion reaction
chemistry,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 131,
no. 36, pp. 12884–12885, 2009.
[287] R. Qian, J. Zhou, S. Yao, H. Wang, and Y. Guo, in Reactive
Intermediates, pp. 113–131, Wiley-VCH, 2010.
[288] V. M. Williams, J. R. Kong, B. J. Ko et al., “ESI-MS, DFT, and
synthetic studies on the H2 -mediated coupling of acetylene:
insertion of C=X bonds into rhodacyclopentadienes and
Brønsted acid cocatalyzed hydrogenolysis of organorhodium
intermediates,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol.
131, no. 44, pp. 16054–16062, 2009.
[289] A. O. Aliprantis and J. W. Canary, “Observation of catalytic
intermediates in the Suzuki reaction by electrospray mass
spectrometry,” Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol.
116, no. 15, pp. 6985–6986, 1994.
[290] L. S. Santos, C. H. Pavam, W. P. Almeida, F. Coelho, and M.
N. Eberlin, “Probing the mechanism of the Baylis-Hillman
reaction by electrospray ionization mass and tandem mass
spectrometry,” Angewandte Chemie, vol. 43, no. 33, pp. 4330–
4333, 2004.
[291] A. A. Sabino, A. H. L. Machado, C. R. D. Correia, and M. N.
Eberlin, “Probing the mechanism of the Heck reaction with
arene diazonium salts by electrospray mass and tandem mass
spectrometry,” Angewandte Chemie, vol. 43, no. 19, pp. 2514–
2518, 2004.
[292] H. Guo, R. Qian, Y. Liao, S. Ma, and Y. Guo, “ESI-MS studies
on the mechanism of Pd(0)-catalyzed three-component
tandem double addition-cyclization reaction,” Journal of the
American Chemical Society, vol. 127, no. 37, pp. 13060–
13064, 2005.
[293] S. R. Wilson and Y. Wu, “A study of nickel-catalyzed coupling
reactions by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,”
Organometallics, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1478–1480, 1993.
[294] Y. Xie, L. F. He, S. C. Lin et al., “Desorption electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry for monitoring the kinetics of
baeyer-villiger solid-state organic reactions,” Journal of the
American Society for Mass Spectrometry, vol. 20, no. 11, pp.
2087–2092, 2009.
[295] D. G. Harman and S. J. Blanksby, “Trapping of a tert-adamantyl peroxyl radical in the gas phase,” Chemical Communications, no. 8, pp. 859–861, 2006.
[296] M. N. Eberlin, “Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry:
a major tool to investigate reaction mechanisms in both
solution and the gas phase,” European Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 19–28, 2007.

International Journal of Analytical Chemistry
[297] V. Kertesz and G. J. V. Berkel, “Chemical imaging with desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry,” Methods
in Molecular Biology, vol. 656, pp. 231–241, 2010.
[298] J. M. Wiseman, D. R. Ifa, Y. Zhu et al., “Desorption electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: imaging drugs and
metabolites in tissues,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 105, no. 47, pp.
18120–18125, 2008.
[299] D. R. Ifa, J. M. Wiseman, Q. Song, and R. G. Cooks, “Development of capabilities for imaging mass spectrometry under
ambient conditions with desorption electrospray ionization
(DESI),” International Journal of Mass Spectrometry, vol. 259,
no. 1–3, pp. 8–15, 2007.
[300] J. M. Wiseman and B. C. Laughlin, “Desorption electrospray
ionization (DESI) mass spectrometry: a brief introduction
and overview,” Current Separations and Drug Development,
vol. 22, pp. 11–14, 2007.

International Journal of

Medicinal Chemistry
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Photoenergy
International Journal of

Organic Chemistry
International
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

International Journal of

Analytical Chemistry
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Advances in

Physical Chemistry
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

International Journal of

Carbohydrate
Chemistry
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Journal of

Quantum Chemistry
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Volume 2014

Submit your manuscripts at
http://www.hindawi.com
Journal of

The Scientific
World Journal
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Journal of

International Journal of

Inorganic Chemistry
Volume 2014

Journal of

Theoretical Chemistry

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Spectroscopy
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Analytical Methods
in Chemistry

Volume 2014

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Chromatography
Research International
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

International Journal of

Electrochemistry
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Journal of

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

Journal of

Catalysts
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Journal of

Applied Chemistry

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Bioinorganic Chemistry
and Applications
Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

International Journal of

Chemistry
Volume 2014

Volume 2014

Spectroscopy
Volume 2014

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
http://www.hindawi.com

Volume 2014

