Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

62 :1

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

R21–R45

REVIEW

Integrated omics: tools, advances and future
approaches
Biswapriya B Misra1, Carl Langefeld1,2, Michael Olivier1 and Laura A Cox1,3
1Center

for Precision Medicine, Section on Molecular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North
California, USA
2Department of Biostatistics, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North California, USA
3Southwest National Primate Research Center, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, Texas, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to L A Cox: laurcox@wakehealth.edu

Abstract
With the rapid adoption of high-throughput omic approaches to analyze biological
samples such as genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics, each
analysis can generate tera- to peta-byte sized data files on a daily basis. These data file
sizes, together with differences in nomenclature among these data types, make the
integration of these multi-dimensional omics data into biologically meaningful context
challenging. Variously named as integrated omics, multi-omics, poly-omics, trans-omics,
pan-omics or shortened to just ‘omics’, the challenges include differences in data
cleaning, normalization, biomolecule identification, data dimensionality reduction,
biological contextualization, statistical validation, data storage and handling, sharing and
data archiving. The ultimate goal is toward the holistic realization of a ‘systems biology’
understanding of the biological question. Commonly used approaches are currently
limited by the 3 i’s – integration, interpretation and insights. Post integration, these
very large datasets aim to yield unprecedented views of cellular systems at exquisite
resolution for transformative insights into processes, events and diseases through
various computational and informatics frameworks. With the continued reduction in
costs and processing time for sample analyses, and increasing types of omics datasets
generated such as glycomics, lipidomics, microbiomics and phenomics, an increasing
number of scientists in this interdisciplinary domain of bioinformatics face these
challenges. We discuss recent approaches, existing tools and potential caveats in the
integration of omics datasets for development of standardized analytical pipelines that
could be adopted by the global omics research community.

Key Words
ff integrated
ff omics
ff genomics
ff transcriptomics
ff proteomics
ff metabolomics
ff network
ff statistics
ff Bayesian
ff machine learning
ff principal component
analysis
ff correlation
ff clustering

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology
(2019) 62, R21–R45

Introduction
Access to large-scale omics datasets (genomics, tran­
scriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, metagenomics,
phenomics, etc.) has revolutionized biology and led to
the emergence of systems approaches to advance our
understanding of biological processes. With decreasing
time and cost to generate these datasets, omics data
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

integration has created both exciting opportunities
and immense challenges for biologists, computational
biologists, biostatisticians and biomathematicians. As an
example of a comprehensive analysis approach, Yugi
et al. (2016) proposed a trans-omics concept of dynamic
networks that includes the three most commonly used

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

layers of omics datasets – transcriptomics, proteomics and
metabolomics and also included newer datasets such as
phosphoproteomics, protein–protein interactions, DNA–
protein interactions and allosteric regulation, which
can reveal critical components of dynamic biological
networks when omics data are successfully integrated.
Using three case studies in datasets from bacteria and
rats, they showed the interplay of the omics layers, and
introduced phenome-wide association, pathway-wide
association and trans-ome-wide association (Trans-OWAS)
studies to connect phenotypes with omics networks that
reflect genetic and environmental factors. These multilayered, multifactorial approaches are computationally
challenging and difficult to display and comprehend
visually. Additional data from microRNA/gene, protein/
protein, DNA/protein, and protein/RNA interactions
further increase the complexity. A recent review enlists
genome-based systems biology tools and applications
available for network analysis, pathway construction,
genome alignments, assemblies, tree viewers and
phylogenies, microarray and RNA-Seq viewers, genome
browsers, visualization tools for comparative genomics,
and tools for building visual prototypes (Pavlopoulos et al.
2015). Similarly, tools, resources, databases and software
for analysis and visualization of proteomics (Oveland
et al. 2015) and metabolomics data (Misra & van der
Hooft 2016, Misra et al. 2017, Misra 2018) are reviewed on
a yearly basis. However, none of these recent publications
provide a comprehensive overview of approaches for
integrating three or more omics datasets.
Although the need for, and the importance of,
integration of omics data has been realized for a broad
range of research areas, including food and nutrition
science (Kato et al. 2011), systems microbiology (Fondi
& Liò 2015), analysis of microbiomes (Muller et al.
2014), genotype–phenotype interactions (Ritchie et al.
2015), systems biology (Mochida & Shinozaki 2011,
Fukushima & Kusano 2013), natural product discovery
(Yang et al. 2011) and disease biology (Pathak & Dave
2014), successful implementation of more than two
omics datasets is very rare. Since Gehlenborg et al.
(2010) produced a useful comprehensive compendium
for visualization of omics data for systems biology using
data from microarrays, RNA deep sequencing, mass
spectrometry (MS), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
and protein interactions, considerable progress has been
made to develop additional tools and approaches for
integrated omics analysis. Broad experimental challenges
in these integrated omics approaches include, but are
not limited to (i) understanding the statistical behavior
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

62 :1

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

R22

of readouts from each omics regime independently, (ii)
recognizing non-obvious relationships that exist between
omics regimes within their original biological context and
(iii) capitalizing on time resolution in omics data, such as
time course studies, to inform directionality (Buescher &
Driggers 2016). A recent review provided data integration
strategies for genomics and proteomics datasets (Huang
et al. 2017), but did not mention and include approaches,
which allow integration of metabolomics datasets.
Although all individual omics datasets might not
have the four vs associated with integration of ‘big data’,
i.e., volume, variety, velocity and veracity, they pose
similar challenges, especially in studies with large sample
numbers. In addition, for high-dimensional datasets of
more than 1000 variables, popularly known as the ‘curse
of dimensionality’, variances among samples become
large and sparse and render cluster analysis uninformative
(Ronan et al. 2016), further posing challenges interpreting
integrated omic datasets. For clarity, we use ‘integrated
omics’ to denote multi-omics approaches integrating
three or more omics datasets and include the major omics
data types, i.e., genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics
and metabolomics.

Strengths and challenges of individual omics
Genomics and transcriptomics
Genomics and transcriptomics have been applied to various
aspects of research and clinical applications ranging from
the pharmaceutical industry, diagnostics and therapeutics,
gene therapy applications, pharmacogenomics and disease
prevention, to developmental biology, evolutionary
genomics and comparative genomics. Thus, the ability
to manage and analyze these types of data has become
necessary for a biomedical scientist’s skill set. The surge
in advancements of next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technologies and progress in genomic data analysis
have led to high-throughput data generation for
genomes (single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), copy
number variants (CNVs), loss of heterozygosity variants,
genomic rearrangements, and rare variants), epigenomes
(DNA methylation, histone modifications, chromatin
accessibility, transcription factor (TF) binding) and
transcriptomes (gene expression, alternative splicing, long
non-coding RNAs and small RNAs such as microRNAs)
(Ritchie et al. 2015). Generally speaking, the nucleic
acid-based omics approaches for data generation rely on
five major steps: appropriate sample collection, highquality nucleic acid extraction, library preparation, clonal

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

amplification, and sequencing (e.g., pyrosequencing,
sequencing-by ligation, or sequencing-by synthesis). The
specific approach used for each step varies based on the
intended downstream application. Following sequencing,
the workflow includes data cleaning, filtering, assembly,
alignment (de novo or reference-based), variant calling,
annotation and functional predictions. In addition, pathway
and/or network analyses are often used to provide biological
context. Heterogeneous datasets pose challenges because
quality assurance, quality control, data normalization and
data reduction methods differ among the various types
of individual datasets. For example, normalization and
scale of RNA-Seq data differs from small RNA-Seq data,
for example, RNA-Seq datasets typically include tens of
thousands of transcripts, while small RNA-Seq datasets
typically include less than 2000 small RNAs. With the
rapid development of single-cell sequencing technologies,
sequencing technologies that produce longer reads, and
applications for genomic and transcriptomic analyses,
additional challenges are emerging such as appropriate
sequence coverage and statistical analysis of single-cell
data (Menon 2017). A review of genomics applications
and tools is provided in Shendure (2017). Best practices
for DNA-seq pipelines are provided by NIH National
Cancer Institute. Readers are further directed to CostaSilva et al. (2017) for a comprehensive analysis of
current transcriptomic analysis tools. Sequencing-based
technologies, which are the most advanced of the omics
technologies in terms of availability of laboratory reagents
for standardized protocols, analytical tools and public
databases for data sharing, provide unique opportunities
to obtain high quality from small amounts of tissues
or individual cells to address a wide range of biological
questions.
Proteomics
Proteomics is used to quantify proteins in multiple sample
types using both shotgun and targeted approaches.
Recent developments in MS have dramatically increased
sensitivity while decreasing the amount of sample required
for high-throughput analyses and now allow for the
detection of minimal differences in protein abundances,
identification of post-translational modifications and
other applications from a wide range of samples and
tissues (Aebersold & Mann 2016). Whether choosing a
chemically labeled or unlabeled quantitative proteomic
approach, the six major steps include appropriate sample
collection, protein extraction, enzymatic digestion of
proteins into peptides, separation/fractionation using
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R23

liquid chromatography (LC) approaches, followed by
MS, peptide and protein identification and quantification
and additional bioinformatics analyses such as pathway
and network analyses. The field has moved forward
from 2D-PAGE-based (dye/fluorescence labeling) protein
spot extraction followed by LC-MS or matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF)
MS characterization to more system-wide screening
approaches with quantitative steps that take advantage
of label-based approaches such as Isotope-Coded Affinity
Tagging, Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino Acids in
Cell Culture (SILAC), 18O Stable Isotope Labeling, Isobaric
Tagging for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ)
and Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) (Bakalarski & Kirkpatrick
2016) or are label-free (Bantscheff et al. 2012, Anand
et al. 2017). Both label-free (Proffitt et al. 2017) and
label-based efforts such as TMT proteomics from diverse
biological matrices have yielded favorable results. The
community has not yet built a consensus in terms of data
formatting, cleaning and normalization, for example,
the use of ion intensity vs peptide-to-spectrum matches,
despite the ongoing efforts through the Proteomics
Standards Initiative (Deutsch et al. 2017). Nonetheless,
proteomics is advancing our understanding in biomedical
research, including diagnosis, protein-based biomarker
development and therapeutics.
Metabolomics
Metabolites are often end products of complex biochemical
cascades that can link the genome, transcriptome and
proteome to phenotype, providing an important key tool
for discovery of the genetic basis of metabolic variation.
Metabolomics can be used to determine relative and
absolute amounts of sugars, lipids, amino acids, organic
acids, nucleotides, steroids, drugs and environmental
constituents from a wide range of sample types including
primary cells, cell lines, tissues, biofluids, entire organisms
and diverse geo-climatic environments. Depending on
the application and instrumentation, metabolomics
captures small molecule information in solid (i.e., solidstate NMR), liquid ((liquid chromatography MS (LC-MS),
capillary electrophoresis MS (CE-MS)) or gas phase (gas
chromatography MS (GC-MS)) using spectroscopy (i.e.,
NMR) and MS (i.e., LC/GC-MS or tandem MS). Major
steps for metabolomics analyses include experimental
design, suitable sample collection strategies, quenching
of metabolism, optimized metabolite extraction
and reconstitution from samples, optional chemical
derivatization, MS (with or without a chromatography

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

interface) or NMR and data analysis, including data
alignment, filtering, imputation, statistical analysis,
annotation and pathway/network analysis. Each of these
steps is highly variable depending upon the platform
used for sample analysis. In addition, data structure,
imputation approaches, identification of unknown
metabolites, normalization, scaling and transformation
can differ significantly for each data type and instrument.
Approaches also differ for targeted or untargeted analyses.
Choosing targeted or untargeted analyses is determined
by the study question where untargeted analyses are
typically used as discovery, hypothesis generating data
and targeted analyses are used to test specific hypotheses.
For both of these approaches, the combination of LC-MS
with complementary GC-MS captures the majority of the
chemical space presented by a biofluid or tissue sample.
Unique challenges to specific omics platforms
Unique challenges emanate from each omics platform
due to the strengths and limitations of each. These are
important to understand when developing methods
and approaches for integrating omics data since the
complexity and completeness of each data type differs.
Linking genotype to phenotype
High-throughput genomics and transcriptomics datasets
critically depend on the ease of nucleic acid amplification
from small amounts of biological material, followed by
reliable quantification and molecule annotation based on
sequence identity. Current sample preparation protocols
provide a means to analyze all DNA and RNA in a
biological sample, for example, all coding and non-coding
RNAs. A major limitation is interpretation of genome and
transcriptome data in the context of biological function,
i.e., the influence of specific variants on phenotypic
variation (Lappalainen et al. 2013). Combining data
from proteomics and metabolomics with genomics and
transcriptomics helps to overcome this limitation by
providing molecular information that links genetic and
epigenetic variation with phenotypic variation.
Quantification of the proteome
Proteomics data often provide information related to
biological function, especially those methods quantifying
isoform variation and post-translational modifications.
However, proteomics approaches still require significant
amounts of sample due to the lack of protein amplification

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R24

methods, and face difficulties in isolation of membrane
proteins, detection of low abundance proteins and
insoluble proteins. For example, representation of
nuclear proteins in a proteomic dataset typically requires
enrichment of nuclei; thus, even untargeted proteomic
approaches will not include data for all proteins within
a given biological sample. The reliance on separation of
complex chemistries (i.e., different charged states and
post-translational modifications) using chromatography
adds to variability in protein quantification in topdown and bottom-up proteomics. In addition, there
is variability in peptide identification due to variation
in peptide structure, charge and hydrophobicity, and
these biochemical properties of peptides and proteins
affect their ability to be detected and identified by NMR
or MS. Analysis pipelines for proteomic data must deal
with absent data (i.e., is the peptide not detected because
it is not ionized efficiently, or is it truly not present in
the sample), normalization and absolute vs relative
quantification (Bantscheff et al. 2012). In recent years,
advances in instrument sensitivity, and the development
of effective isotopic labeling tools for tissue samples have
significantly improved the accuracy and reproducibility
of peptide and protein quantification using MS. This now
allows the effective quantification (using peptide spectral
match counts, peak intensity or peak area quantification
or the use of isobaric tags for quantification) of peptides in
complex mixtures such as tissue lysates.

Quantification of the metabolome
Metabolomics data can link genetic and proteomic
variation to functional variation and provide novel
insights into metabolic, regulatory and signaling activities
in a given cell or tissue. However, similar to proteins,
metabolites are not amplifiable and only 15–30% of the
entire mass spectra are identifiable and quantifiable, thus
limiting the usefulness of the amount of information
generated. In addition, false positives are a challenge due
to the use of score-based spectral annotation of molecules.
Variability in sample handling, platform used, chemical
heterogeneity of small molecules, different quantification
methods and lack of standards for data formats and
analysis pipelines are major challenges (Spicer et al.
2017a,b). Large-scale efforts in the metabolomics research
community are currently ongoing to address these
challenges including standardization, annotation of
metabolites, interoperability of protocols and methods
and statistical considerations.

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Issues shared among the omics platforms
Most omics approaches require knowledge of handling
large datasets, annotation of biomolecules within a
dataset, sample size vs number of biomolecules quantified,
relevance of biomolecules quantified (signal versus noise),
quality of output and accessibility of data for sharing
due to data volume and complexity. The included
Glossary provides definitions of fundamental terms used
in this review.
Data handling
Data handling, independent of omics data type,
must address issues of data filtering and cleaning
(i.e., comparable to data wrangling in data science),
imputation, transformation, normalization and scaling.
Unfortunately, there are no ‘gold standard’ unified
workflows for any type of omics data (although genomics
and sequencing approaches often use widely accepted
standards for sequence alignment, QC and/or variant
calling), use of one analysis pipeline (or analysis tool,
that is, search algorithm for proteomics data or statistical
workflows) will yield different results than another, and
workflows are constantly evolving as new computational
tools are being developed and implemented. For these
reasons, it is essential that every analysis pipeline is well
documented, including versions of software (i.e., version
control) used for each step in the pipeline and rationale
for parameters implemented.
Annotation
Annotation of biomolecules for any omics dataset also
provides substantial challenges. For example, standard
model organisms (fly, nematode, mouse, non-human
primate, human) have well-annotated genomes,
transcriptomes and proteomes, and the array of tools
available for interactive annotation such as miRNA/gene
interactions dramatically outnumber those available
for non-standard model organisms. Extensive data can
be lost when working with non-standard organisms
without the use of comparative approaches. That said,
non-standard organisms often provide data on molecules
that are relevant to human biology, but cannot readily be
identified where healthy tissues are required to generate
high-quality samples (as these are often challenging to
collect invasively in humans). For example, use of an
iterative approach to annotate transcripts for non-standard
model species, where the species genome is first used
for annotation and unannotated transcripts are aligned
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R25

against multiple other genomes, significantly improves
the number of annotated transcripts (Cox et al. 2012). In
addition, creating peptide reference libraries using speciesand individual-specific RNA-Seq transcript sequence data,
significantly improves peptide annotation; a study of the
baboon liver proteome by Proffitt et al. (2017) identified
novel unannotated splice variants and 101 unique
peptides missed by standard reference databases. In case
of metabolomics data, not only the relative metabolite
abundance, but also the chemical repertoire of an
organism is often unknown, and annotation of molecules
is even more challenging without the knowledge of their
transcriptomes and proteomes.
Study design and analytic assumptions
To improve inferential robustness and reproducibility, a
number of overarching study design and statistical concepts
need to be implemented in large, omic studies. Careful
study design and subject/sample (experimental unit)
recruitment consistent with the study design is necessary
for clear, parsimonious testing of a priori hypotheses
and enables agnostic studies. Convenience samples can
be informative but are subject to biases not present, on
average, in formal randomized studies. With the exception
of ancestry in genetic association studies, often these
biases are largely ignored. At best, ad hoc methods (e.g.,
propensity scores analysis) can attempt to reduce the bias
but are inferior to randomized designs. Understanding
the degree of independence among the experimental
units is important to prevent pseudoreplication. Multiple
measures on the truly independent experimental unit
(e.g., tissue sample, individual) requires analyses using
subsampling methods or fixed or random effects repeatedmeasures modeling to (1) compute the proper variance
estimate for tests of hypotheses and interval estimation
and (2) reduce bias. Unfortunately, random and mixedeffects models generally require a large number of
independent experimental units for proper type 1 error
rate control.
Once a study design is selected that best addresses
the study question, a set of statistical or machinelearning approaches specific to that study design and
question is selected. Each analysis, whether using classical
statistical or machine-learning methods, has underlying
assumptions that need to be verified. Too often the large
number of variables is viewed as making assumption
validation impossible or not worth the investment.
Further, compounding this issue is the easy access to
high-speed computing with programs that use algorithms

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

often not understood by the analyst. Combined with the
pressure for rapid results, these perceptions, knowledge
and pressures often result in many false inferences,
both type 1 and type 2 errors and significantly impact
reproducibility, scientific progress and the cost of science.
However, large-scale analyses with pretty graphics should
not be a permit for poor-quality analyses.
An important step in a proper analysis is to clearly
understand from the experimental question whether the
omics variable is a predictor or an outcome. Although
in some special situations it will not matter, in others
it will. For example, consider an experiment with two
groups (disease, disease free) and a continuous omic
variable meeting the normality assumption (see below).
It is well known that the standard equal variance t-test
is asymptotically equivalent to the score test from a
logistic regression model. However, adjusting for a set
of covariates (e.g., age, gender, BMI) and computing
the analysis of covariance instead of the t-test is not
equivalent to the logistic model. Thus, aligning the
analytic approach to match the outcome is important
so that the proper variance is estimated for the test and
interval estimates.
As an example, a classical statistical approach to
the analysis of omic data from independent subjects
(e.g. >1000 metabolites) is a linear model (e.g., analysis
of variance, linear regression). Regardless of whether
the omic variable is the predictor or the outcome, the
methods assume that the residuals from the linear
model are independent and approximate a normal
distribution with a mean of zero and a constant variance.
A transformation of the outcome variable (triglycerides,
metabolite) is often required to meet these assumptions.
Although it may seem daunting to identify an appropriate
transformation for hundreds or thousands of variables, it
is easy to implement the Box-Cox power transformation
(Box & Cox 1964) (e.g., natural logarithm, square root,
inverse) algorithm to quickly identify an appropriate
distribution. For variables not easily assigned to these
transformations, alternative models may need to be
applied (e.g., tweetie or tobit model if the distribution
has a large number of zeros and then remainder follows
a normal or log-normal distribution). If the omics
data are predictors in a model, the concern shifts from
conditional normality of the omic variable to assuring
that a few outliers do not overly influence inferences
from the modeling. Such modest care in analyses can
greatly accelerate true discoveries, while reducing false
discoveries, thereby increasing reproducibility and
lowering the ultimate cost of science.
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R26

Statistical power
Major statistical challenges for all omics data include
the number of samples in a study versus the number of
molecules quantified in each sample (leading to false
positives and true negatives), analysis of time series data and
treatment of data for targeted and untargeted (unbiased)
approaches, i.e. discerning true biological signal from
noise. Sample numbers per group may also vary for these
different technologies with the ability to highly multiplex
samples for genomics and transcriptomics, to moderately
multiplex samples for proteomics, with a lack of
multiplexing workflows for metabolomics. An additional
challenge for integrating different omics datasets is the
large variation in the number of observations per sample
where a genome typically includes millions of variants,
a transcriptome typically includes tens of thousands of
quantified molecules, a small transcriptome includes less
than 2000 molecules and proteomes and metabolomes
include thousands of quantified molecules. Detection
of differences in abundance of molecules also varies
significantly where a transcriptome may show differences
in a range of 105 and a metabolome may only show
differences in a range of 103.

Data archiving and sharing
Additional issues for many omics datasets are the lack of a
standardized nomenclature, data formatting and eventual
public access to datasets. This has largely been addressed
for genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic data where
datasets can be, and are expected to be, deposited in
public databases upon manuscript publication. However,
standardization of data and development of a central
public database for other types of omics data is yet to
be implemented and will require the definition of data
standards that will allow re-analysis of deposited data,
similar to the MIAME (minimum information about a
microarray experiment) standards first developed for
microarray data (Brazma et al. 2001). This was followed
by minimum information about a genome sequence
(MIGS) (Field et al. 2008), minimum information about
a proteomics experiment (MIAPE) in proteomics (Taylor
et al. 2007), metabolomics standards initiative (MSI) in
metabolomics (Fiehn et al. 2007, Sumner et al. 2007),
minimum information about a single amplified genome
(MISAG) in genomics and minimum information about
a metagenome-assembled genome (MIMAG) of bacteria
and archaea in metagenomics (Bowers et al. 2017). In
summary, abiding by these recommended practices of
minimum information (i.e., MIXX) will lead to scalable

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

and interoperable protocols for generation of reproducible
datasets for comparing standalone omics data sets across
multiple biological samples, analytical platforms and
research laboratories worldwide.

Tools available for integration of
multi-omics data
Analyzing thousands of measurements in each omics
experiment is a computationally complex process, where
extraction of meaningful correlations and true interactions
is not trivial. This is further complicated by the fact that
biological systems often yield non-linear interactions
and joint effects of multiple factors, making it difficult to
discern true biological signals from random noise – noise
can come from biological systems, unrelated analytical
platforms and diverse data-specific analysis workflows. For
instance, cell-type, tissue-type and organ-type specificities
of gene, protein or metabolite abundances show interindividual variability, for which biological levels of
organization can pose challenges for extraction of useful
data within and among these high-dimensional datasets.
Increasing number of studies incorporate a diverse array
of relatively newer omics approaches such as fluxomics,
ionomics, microbiomics and glycomics with biomedical
datasets for identification and prediction of health status
or outcomes from interventions. Before omics scale
data integration, data normalization is imperative given
that data come from different technologies. Figure 1
summarizes a generalized integrated omics workflow.
Data integration often requires statistical and even
machine-learning tools (Min et al. 2016) for a multiomics view (Libbrecht & Noble 2015). Machine-learning
approaches are useful for combined analyses of integrated
omics datasets and clinical data to facilitate dimension
reduction, clustering, association with clinical measures
and prediction of disease (Li et al. 2016).
Simplistic, descriptive and exploratory approaches
such as multivariate analysis tools like principal
component analysis (PCA) can often be used to reduce data
dimensionality, while canonical correlation analysis (CCA)
can be used to investigate the overall correlation between
two sets of variables. Other omics integrative frameworks
involve sparse CCA (Parkhomenko et al. 2009), multiple
factor analysis (De Tayrac et al. 2009) and multivariate
partial least square regression analysis (Palermo et al.
2009). In a recent review, Wanichthanarak et al. (2015)
identified several available tools and packages for the
integration of genomic, proteomic and metabolomic
datasets using pathway enrichment, biological network or
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R27

empirical correlation analysis. Nonetheless, while most of
these tools require standard R-statistical programming or
Python or Galaxy, implementation has been defined as
‘difficult’ by the authors. Thus, the need for more user
friendly tools remains.
For instance, the integrated omics analyses for
understanding different types of cancers at the molecular
level pose additional challenges due to very high
heterogeneity of samples. Pavel et al. (2016) used a fuzzy
logic modeling framework (Xu et al. 2008) to integrate
multiple types of omics data with expert curated biological
rules for identification of cancer drivers and to infer patientspecific gene activity. To deal with sample heterogeneity,
Wang and Gu (2016) have proposed three clustering
categories, direct integrative clustering, clustering of
clusters and regulatory integrative clustering. Nibbe et al.
(2010) demonstrated that integration of complementary
data sources (transcriptomic and proteomic data) using
a ‘proteomics-first’ approach can enhance discovery
of candidate sub-networks in cancer. This approach,
which identifies proteomic targets with significant foldchanges between tumor and control tissues, can be used
to ‘seed’ novel networks that reveal protein–protein
interaction (PPI) sub-networks functionally associated
with phenotype. This approach has led to the discovery
of protein–protein interaction-based changes in human
colorectal cancer tissues (Nibbe et al. 2010). Ideally, network
generation approaches will not rely predominantly on
known function(s) of a molecule since many genes and
proteins have been shown to have different activities and
functions in different biological systems, and the system
being investigated may include key molecules with novel
functions and/or novel molecules. Even though weighted
gene coexpression network analysis (WGCNA) has
been heavily used for unbiased integration of genomic
and transcriptomic data with quantitative trait data to
identify coordinated modules of genes and gene variants
associated with variation in phenotypic variation, it
remains to be seen whether this algorithm is useful for
integration of other omics datasets from diverse analytical
platforms (e.g., proteomics, metabolomics, etc.) or more
heterogeneous data such as various types of clinical data.
Currently available tools for integration of omics
data include web-based tools requiring no computational
experience as well as more versatile tools for those with
computational experience. User friendly, web-based tools
requiring no computational experience include Paintomics,
3Omics and Galaxy (P, M). However, the application of user
friendly tools should not be done without an understanding
of the underlying methods. Blind application of easy use tools

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R28

Figure 1
A typical integrated omics workflow showing input datasets, output datasets and results. Using individual omics datasets that are closer to genotype
(genomics and transcriptomics), and those closer to phenotype (proteomics and metabolomics), plus a host of other omics platforms, datasets are
integrated using statistical or advanced machine learning approaches. Results may be simple pathways or complex networks and may include both
known and novel molecules. In addition, results may predict health or disease states, provide insights for effective therapeutic interventions, or reveal
spatio-temporal regulation of systems such as cell-, tissue- or organ-type specificity.

often adversely affects progress in the field and ultimately
makes science cost more (e.g., unnecessary additional studies
to debunk entrenched falsehoods). For more advanced
users with expertise in programming and interfacing with
computational tools, tools such as IntegrOmics, SteinerNet,
Omics Integrator, MixOmics are available. These tools
allow customization of various parameters and settings
allowing more control of data analyses. Those interested in
integration of datasets driven from metabolomics can opt
for online tools such as XCMSOnline, which allows multiomics integration of metabolomics data with genomics
and proteomics as well (Table 1).
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Recent examples of integration in real
world datasets
A majority of the current literature uses terms such as
multi-omics and integrated omics to denote research
efforts where only two omics datasets were integrated
(e.g. transcriptomics and proteomics, or proteomics and
metabolomics, etc.), and multiple cases where the omics
datasets integrated were only at the level of the genome
(e.g., ChipSeq and methylomics). As part of this review,
we highlight recent examples of successful multi-omics
integration which include at least three different omics

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

License, Web, Local

R

Ingenuity Pathway Analysis,
Qiagen
OncoIMPACT

Difficult

Difficult

Easy

Easy

Easy

Difficult

Difficult

Easy

Easy

Moderate

Easy

Integrates genotype, gene expression and phenotype data
to build models

https://www.c2b2.columbia.edu/danapeerlab/
html/camelot.html

http://mixomics.org/

http://fraenkel.mit.edu/omicsintegrator, https://
github.com/fraenkel-lab/OmicsIntegrator
http://yjjang.github.io/mongkie/

https://usegalaxy.org/

https://www.qiagenbioinformatics.com/products/
ingenuity-pathway-analysis/
https://github.com/CSB5/OncoIMPACT

http://research.mssm.edu/integrative-networkbiology/Software.html

http://www.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/mpc/software/
xplatcom/index.html.en

http://3omics.cmdm.tw/

http://bamics2.cmbi.ru.nl/websoftware/phenolink/

https://cran.r-project.org/src/contrib/Archive/
SteinerNet/

http://impala.molgen.mpg.de

http://www.paintomics.org

http://math.univ-toulouse.fr/biostat

http://www.pathwaystudio.com/

https://labs.genetics.ucla.edu/horvath/
CoexpressionNetwork/Rpackages/WGCNA/
https://www.mskcc.org/departments/
epidemiology-biostatistics/biostatistics/icluster

https://mapman.gabipd.org/

Availability

62 :1

(Continued )

Chen et al. (2009)

Rohart et al. (2017)

Jang et al. (2016)

Tuncbag et al. (2016)

Fan et al. (2015), Davidson
et al. (2016)

Bertrand et al. (2015)

Krämer et al. (2014)

Yoo et al. (2014)

Kohl et al. (2014)

Kuo et al. (2013)

Bayjanov et al. (2012)

Tuncbag et al. (2012)

Kamburov et al. (2011)

García-Alcalde et al. (2011)

Cao et al. (2009)

Yuryev et al. (2009)

Shen et al. (2009)

Langfelder & Horvath (2008)

Thimm et al. (2004)

Reference

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

Statistical approaches for integration
CAusal Modelling with
Matlab
Expression Linkage for cOmplex
Traits (Camelot)

R

NA

Multi-Omics Data
matcher

MixOmics

R

CrossPlatform
Commander

Java

Web

3Omics

MONGKIE

Web

PhenoLink

Python, Web

R

SteinerNet

Omics Integrator

Difficult

Web

IMPaLA

Web

Easy

Web

Paintomics

Visualize and map gene expression, metabolite or other
data, displays large data sets onto diagrams of metabolic
pathways
A comprehensive collection of R functions for performing
various aspects of weighted correlation network analysis
Detection of novel biomarkers, their ranking and annotation
with existing knowledge using corresponding
Transcriptomics and Proteomics data sets
Analysis and visualization of disease mechanisms, gene
expression and proteomics and metabolomics data
Efficiently performs integrative analyses of two types of
‘omics’ variables that are measured on the same samples
Integrated visual analysis of transcriptomics and
metabolomics data
Joint pathway analysis of transcriptomics or proteomics and
metabolomics data that also performs over-representation
or enrichment analysis
Integrating transcriptional, proteomic and interactome data
by searching for the solution to the prize-collecting Steiner
tree problem
Phenotype links to a multitude of ~omics data, e.g., gene
presence/absence (determined by e.g.: CGH or nextgeneration sequencing), gene expression (determined by
e.g.: microarrays or RNA-Seq), or metabolite abundance
(determined by e.g.: GC-MS)
Integrating multiple inter- or intra-transcriptomic, proteomic,
and metabolomic human data
Detection of novel biomarkers, their ranking and annotation
with existing knowledge using corresponding
Transcriptomics and Proteomics data sets
Identify and correct sample labeling errors in multiple types
of molecular data, which can be used in further integrative
analysis
Integration and mapping of genomics, transcriptomics,
proteomics, and metabolomics datasets
Algorithmic framework that nominates patient-specific
driver genes by integratively modeling genomic mutations
(point, structural and copy number) and the resulting
perturbations in transcriptional programs via defined
molecular networks
Development of a complete suite for integrated omics
analysis, proteomics informed by transcriptomics analysis
available to the typical bench scientist
Integrate proteomic data, gene expression data and/or
epigenetic data using a protein–protein interaction network
Multi-layered omics data such as somatic mutations, copy
number variations, and gene expression data
Provides a wide range of linear multivariate methods for
data exploration, integration, dimension reduction and
visualization of biological data sets

Functionality

B B Misra et al.

GalaxyP, GalaxyM

Difficult

R
Easy

Easy

License, Web, Local

Difficult

R

Pathway Studio,
Ariadne Genomics
IntegrOmics

Moderate

Easy

friendliness

User

R

Java

Omics data integration tools
MapMan

Weighted Gene Coexpression
Network Analysis (WGCNA)
iCluster

platform

Computational

List of various tools, software, statistical approaches and databases available for integrated –omics approaches.

Name

Table 1

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology
R29

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

R

R

NA

R

R

Web

PLRS

NuChart

In-Trans Process Associated and
Cis-Correlated (iPAC)

Multi-objective optimization
(MOO)

Network smoothed T-statistic
SVMs (stSVM)/netClass

BioMiner

MATLAB

Easy

http://systherDB.microdiscovery.de/

https://sourceforge.net/projects/netclassr/

CRAN

CRAN

NF

http://bioconductor.org/

https://sites.google.com/site/
patientspecificdatafusion/

https://www.c2b2.columbia.edu/danapeerlab/
html/conexic.html
http://csbi.ltdk.helsinki.fi/CNAmet/

http://five3genomics.com/technologies/paradigm

CRAN

http://quantbio-tools.princeton.edu/cgi-bin/
COALESCE

https://www.mskcc.org/departments/
epidemiology-biostatistics/biostatistics/icluster

Bauer et al. (2015)

Cun & Fröhlich (2014)

Mosca and Milanesi (2013)

Aure et al. (2013)

Merelli et al. (2013)

Leday & van de Wiel (2013)

Louhimo and Hautaniemi
(2011)
Yuan et al. (2011)

Akavia et al. (2010)

Vaske et al. (2010)

Chari et al. (2010)

Huttenhower et al. (2009)

Shen et al. (2009)

Meng et al. (2016)

Meng et al. (2014)

Menichetti et al. (2014)

Liu et al. (2013)

Srivastava et al. (2013)

Kirk et al. (2012)

Li et al. (2012)

Savage et al. (2010)

Reference

62 :1

Difficult

Difficult

Integrates CNV, DNA methylation, and allelic loss of
heterozygosity status to find genes representing key nodes
in the pathways and significant genes
Identifies pathway-level activities from multi-dimensional
cancer genomics datasets
Integrates matched copy number, amplifications and
deletions, and gene expression data from tumor samples
Integrative analysis of high-throughput copy number, DNA
methylation and gene expression data
Bayesian nonparametric modeling that integrates copy
number and expression data to jointly classify patients into
cancer subgroups
flexible modeling of the association between DNA copy
number and mRNA expression
Annotation and statistical analysis of a list of input genes
with information relying on high-throughput sequencing
data, integrating knowledge about genomic features that
are involved in the chromosome spatial organization
Multi-step method to identify genes that are in-cis correlated
through integrating gene expression and CNV data, as well
as genes that are in-trans associated to the biological
processes
Generates networks of biological components that
incorporate multi-omics information, such as
transcriptomics data from two different sources
Integrates network information and other kinds of experimental
data into one classifier, by smoothing t-statistics of individual
genes or miRNAs over the structure of a combined protein–
protein interaction and miRNA-target gene network
BioMiner incorporates transcriptomic and cross-omics
high-throughput data sets, with a focus on cancer

Joint latent variable model for integrative clustering that
incorporates flexible modeling of the associations between
different data types and the variance–covariance structure
within data types
Genomic data and Bayesian integration to predict
co-regulated gene modules

Weighted multiplex networks are characterized by significant NA
correlations across layers
Exploratory data analysis method that identifies
https://rdrr.io/bioc/omicade4/man/mcia.html
co-relationships between multiple high-dimensional
datasets
Gene set analysis based on multiple omics data
https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/
bioc/html/mogsa.html

NA

https://github.com/tomlof/OnPLS

https://github.com/smason/mdipp

http://zhoulab.usc.edu/sMBPLS/

NA

Availability

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

NA

Difficult

Difficult

Difficult

Difficult

R

Patient-specific Data Fusion
(PSDF)

Medium

Java

COpy Number and EXpression In
Cancer (CONEXIC)
CNAmet

Difficult

Difficult

R

Commercial

Easy

Web

Difficult

Difficult

Difficult

Difficult

Difficult

Network-free Bayesian approach that adopts a mixture
modeling approach using hierarchical Dirichelet process to
perform integrative modeling of two datasets
Multi-dimensional regulatory modules from several layers of
genomic datasets
Integrates information from a wide range of different datasets
and data types simultaneously including capabilities to
model time series data using Gaussian processes
Multiblock data analysis with prefiltering of unique and
locally joint variation
Discriminate different classes of samples based on
standardization and merger of several omics

Functionality

B B Misra et al.

PARADIGM

Combinatorial Algorithm for
Expression and Sequencebased Cluster Extraction
(COALESCE)
Multiple Concerted Disruption
method

Tools for integration within the domain of genomics
iCluster
R

R

NA

moCluster

NA

Factor Analysis (FA) and linear
discriminant analysis (LDA)
(FALDA)
Weighted multiplex networks

R

NA

Python

OnPLS

Multiple coinertia analysis
(MCIA)

Difficult

R, C++

Multiple dataset integration
(MDI)

Difficult

MATLAB

NA

friendliness

User

Sparse multiblock PLS (sMBPLS)

platform

Computational

NA

Continued.

Transcriptional Modules
Discovery (TMD)

Name

Table 1

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology
R30

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

R, C

Galaxy
Web

Web

R

CPAS

Galaxy Integrated Omics (GIO)
BioVLAB-mCpG-SNP-EXPRESS

GeneTrail2

Mergeomics

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Web, R

Easy

Easy

Systems biology scale workflow, that allows rapid metabolic
pathway mapping from raw metabolomics data to
integration of genomic and proteomics data for
mechanistic insights

Collage of pathways amenable to automated and manual
workflows for mapping of genes, proteins, and metabolites
Directory to obtain an array of commercially available and
free tools for omics analysis

http://g6g-softwaredirectory.com/apps/bio/
cross-omics/pathway-dbs-kbs/
ListingsByAppCOPathwayKBDB.php
https://xcmsonline.scripps.edu/

http://wikipathways.org/

http://www.peptideatlas.org/PASS/PASS00512
https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/

https://github.com/jguhlin/odg

http://prokaryomics.com/

http://www.ebi.ac.uk/metabolights/
http://www.mimomics.eu

http://gnps.ucsd.edu

https://omictools.com/
http://www.metabolomicsworkbench.org/
http://www.cardiogenbase.com/faq.php

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
http://www.proteomexchange.org/
http://moped.proteinspire.org

https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/
html/MultiAssayExperiment.html

http://mergeomics.research.idre.ucla.edu/

https://genetrail2.bioinf.uni-sb.de/

https://usegalaxy.org/
http://bhi2.snu.ac.kr:3000/

https://sourceforge.net/projects/%20cpasv1/files/

NA

http://hcil.snu.ac.kr/~rati/miRTarVis/index.html
http://sulab.scripps.edu/omicspipe

Forsberg et al. (2018)

NA

Slenter et al. (2018)

Desiere et al. (2006)
Vizcaíno et al. (2013)

Guhlin et al. (2017)

Kim et al. (2016)

Kale et al. (2016)
Auffray et al. (2016)

Wang et al. (2016)

Henry et al. (2014)
Sud et al. (2015)
Alexandar et al. (2015)

Pruitt et al. (2006)
Vizcaíno et al. (2014)
Montague et al. (2014)

Ramos et al. (2017)

Shu et al. (2016)

Stöckel et al. (2016)

Fan et al. (2015)
Chae et al. (2016)

Zhang et al. (2015)

Zhang et al. (2015)

Jung et al. (2015)
Fisch et al. (2015)

62 :1

The table provides the computational platform in which tools are available (web based or programming language), degree of user friendliness, functionalities, availability, and associated cited literature in their chronological order of
appearance. Ease of use definitions: difficult – requires in-depth understanding and knowledge of the specified programming language; medium – modest level of proficiency or programming skills; andeasy – requires minor level of
skill to implement the tool.
CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; ChIP-seq, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing; ENCODE, Encyclopedia Of DNA Elements; eQTL, expression quantitative trait loci; NA, not available; NF, not found; WGCNA, Weighted
Gene Coexpression Network Analysis.

Web

Easy

Web
Web

PeptideAtlas repository
Proteomics Identifications
Database (PRIDE)
WikiPathways

XCMS Online

Easy
Easy

Clojure, Java

Omics Database Generator

Web

Easy

Web

Metabolomics datasets archiving
Innovation project funded by the European Commission,
running from October 2012 till October 2017, coordinated
by the Leiden University Medical Center
Multi-omics compendium for Escherichia coli with cohesive
meta-data information semi-supervised normalization
pipelines and perform experimental characterization,
growth, transcriptome, proteome
Uses genome files and output from various programs to create
a graph database for querying genomic data across domains
Proteomics
Proteomics

Genomics and transcriptomics
Proteomics
Database with a multi-omics resource portal that combines
250 publicly available protein and mRNA abundance
profiles of four different model organisms, human, mouse,
worm and yeast
Repositories which aids in integration of omics datasets
Metabolomics datasets archiving
Database contains more than ~1500 CVD associated genes
and relevant information from about ~24000 publications
Metabolomics (untargeted datasets) archiving

miRNA–mRNA integration
Integration of RNA-Seq, miRNA-seq, Exome-seq, WholeGenome sequencing, ChIP-seq analyses
Trans-omics pathway analysis of genome-wide CNVs and
mRNA expression profiles data, a gene set enrichment
analysis algorithm
Recognizes disease relevant biological pathways through
joint pathway analysis of genome-wide copy numbers
variants (CNVs) and mRNA expression profile data
Transcriptomics, proteomics
Integrated analysis of gene expression, DNA methylation,
and genetic variations
Integrated analysis of transcriptomic, miRNomic, genomic
and proteomic datasets
Genetic association (e.g., GWAS or exome sequencing),
transcriptome-wide association (e.g., TWAS from
microarray or RNA sequencing studies), and epigenetic
association (e.g., EWAS from methylome association
studies), functional genomics (such as eQTLs and ENCODE
annotations), biological pathways, and gene networks
Storage, and operation on multiple diverse genomic data,
i.e., Cancer Genome Atlas data followed by scalable,
reproducible statistical analysis of multiomics data

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

G6G Directory of Omics and
Intelligent Software

Easy
NA

Web
Web

Difficult

Easy

Web

Global Natural Products Social 242
Molecular Networking (GNPS)
MetaboLights
Methods for Integrated analysis
of multiple Omics datasets
(MIMOmics)
Ecomics

Easy
Easy
Easy

Web
Web
Web

Easy
Easy
NF

Difficult

Difficult

Easy

Easy
Easy

Difficult

Easy
Difficult

B B Misra et al.

OMICtools
MetabolomicsWorkBench
CardioGenBase

Databases and resources for integration
NCBI – multiple databases
Web
ProteomeXchange Consortium
Web
MOPED
Web

R, Bioconductor

C, R

CPAS

MultiAssayExperiment

Java
Python

miRTarVis
Omics Pipe

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology
R31

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

platforms and allow the discovery of novel biological
factors and/or processes through this approach.
Complex diseases
Williams et al. (2016) integrated sequential window
acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH MS)
generated proteomics data with metabolomics and
genomics datasets for a systems level assessment of liver
mitochondrial function. This study included 386 mice from
the BXD recombinant inbred strain and used three omics
datasets – transcriptome (25,136 transcripts), proteome
(2622 proteins) and metabolome (981 metabolites).
They validated interactions of key molecules nominated
from this approach and showed that sequence variants
in the Cox7a2l gene alter the encoded protein’s activity,
leading to downstream differences in mitochondrial super
complex formation. This study demonstrates the utility of
omics integration for identification of functional variants
underlying complex diseases.
Zierer et al. (2016) integrated epigenomics,
transcriptomics, glycomics and metabolomics, with
disease traits from 510 participants of the TwinsUK
cohort to find molecular pathways underlying agerelated diseases. Using network analysis where the mixed
graphical model was inferred using the Graphical Random
Forest (GRaFo) method, they identified seven modules
representative of distinct aspects of aging. Their findings
demonstrate interconnectivity in age-related diseases and
that use of integrated omics can reveal novel molecular
networks relevant to complex phenotypes.
Krishnan et al. (2018) used adipose and liver tissue
gene expression analysis by microarray, bioenergetics
measurements in cell lines and mitochondria followed
by GWAS and eQTL analyses to integrate various omics
datasets via an advanced multiscale embedded gene
coexpression network analysis (Song & Zhang 2015) that
was preferred over WGCNA analyses for identification of
networks. Clearly, the authors concluded that network
modeling from a large dataset and in vitro approaches
helped predict key driver genes regulating non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease.
Recently, using a BXD mouse cohort as sources
for multi-omics analysis (including (expression-based)
phenome-wide association, transcriptome-/proteome-wide
association and (reverse-) mediation analysis), Li et al.
(2017) demonstrated the feasibility for identification of
gene–gene, gene–phenotype links that are translatable
to cross populations and species in their multi-omics
framework.
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

62 :1

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

R32

Immunity and infection
The integrative personal omics profile (iPOP) is a pioneering
study that combined genomics, transcriptomics,
proteomics, metabolomics and autoantibody profiles
from a single individual over a 14-month period. In this
approach, pathways enriched for differentially expressed
molecules were computed at each time point, while taking
into account pathway structure and longitudinal design
(Stanberry et al. 2013). Similar endeavors in organ-specific
multi-omic integrated tools include kidney and urinary
pathway knowledge base for kidney diseases where
as an example of the utility of this integrated database
to facilitate rapid hypothesis generation, the authors
identified calreticulin as a protein central to human
interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy in chronic kidney
transplant rejection and validated the importance of this
protein in vitro and in vivo (Klein et al. 2012). Another
study characterized response of ferrets to pandemic
H1N1 influenza viral infection using an integrated omics
approach with lipidomic, metabolomic and proteomic
datasets and discovered that pro-inflammatory lipid
precursors impact virus pathogenesis (Tisoncik-Go et al.
2016). These studies highlight the power of integrated
omics approaches to identify novel molecules that
influence immune function and infection.
Cancer
Liu et al. (2013) used both an integrated and a nonintegrated approach to analyze the NCI-60 cancer cell
line panel to identify potential molecular mechanisms
dysregulated in cancer. They performed joint analysis of
the small transcriptome (miRNAs), transcriptome and
proteome using factor analysis with linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) and demonstrated that the integrated
approach provides a more complete picture of miRNA/
gene interactions in the Wnt signaling pathway, which
is a surrogate marker of melanoma progression. Liu
et al. (2016) generated and integrated data on genomic
CNVs, genomic methylation, transcriptome and small
transcriptome datasets to characterize subtypes of
hepatocellular carcinoma. Using 256 hepatocellular
carcinoma samples, they identified five hepatocellular
carcinoma subgroups with distinct molecular signatures,
and each with a distinct survival rate. Other studies
have used this approach obtaining high quality and
comprehensive omics measurements, followed by
integrated omics analysis to describe molecular variation
in other cancer types (Jiang et al. 2016, Kamoun et al. 2016).
Further, MiRbooking algorithms provide vital insights

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

into integration of miRNA–mRNA in hybridization
competition that occurs in a given cellular condition (Weill
et al. 2015). An integrated omics approach in cancer may
provide information for improved diagnosis of carcinoma
subtype pathogenesis. Recently, Muqaku et al. (2017),
using both label-free and targeted proteomics, lipidomics
and metabolomics efforts followed by data integration
in human serum samples from patients with metastatic
melanoma, proposed a model on reprogramming of organ
functions induced by metastatic melanoma through
formation of platelet activating factors from long-chain
polyunsaturated phosphatidylcholines under oxidative
conditions.
Host microbiome interactions
Heintz-Buschart et al. (2016) used a multi-omics approach
integrating metagenomic, metatranscriptomic and meta­
proteomic data from the gastrointestinal microbiome to
identify intra- and inter-individual variation in subjects
with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM). The study revealed
several microbial populations contributing to functional
differences among T1DM individuals. Thaiss et al. (2016)
used integrated omics of the transcriptome, methylome,
metagenome and metabolome with imaging data to
quantify the global programming of the host circadian
transcriptional, epigenetic and metabolite oscillations by
intestinal microbiota. They found that the gut microbiome
and host circadian activities are tightly linked and showed
that disruption of microbiome rhythmicity abrogates
normal host genome, epigenome and transcriptional
oscillations in both intestine and liver, influencing host
diurnal fluctuations. These integrated omics studies are
beginning to reveal the complex interactions between the
host and the gut microbiome, and the resulting impact on
host metabolism.
Quinn et al. (2016) implemented an integrated omics
pipeline for human and environmental omic samples,
16S rRNA gene sequencing, inferred gene function
profiles and LC-MS/MS metabolomics, in less than 48 h
using Qiita, Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities
by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) and
Global Natural Product Social Molecular Networking
(GNPS) pipelines. This study demonstrated feasibility for
using an omics approach to assess human health status in
a time frame that matches traditional clinically relevant
culture-based approaches. Additional studies of this type
may provide more feasible and accurate methods for
microbe identification in the clinic and eliminate the
need for culturing microbes.
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R33

Statistical approaches for current challenges
The 1930s graph theory and 1950s holistic general system
theory form the basis of diverse mathematical tools for
network analysis across various scientific disciplines
including integration of omics datasets. Graph theory
defines a graph as a set of nodes with each pair joined by an
edge, and each edge associated with two nodes that form
an unordered pair. Holistic general system theory defines
a system as an entity with interrelated and interdependent
parts, and changing any one part affects other parts and
affects the entire system in predictable patterns. This
theory has, since then formed the corner stone of largescale high-throughput and high-dimensional data set
oriented omics studies.
Number of samples vs number of molecules
Optimal statistical analyses are central to the compu­
tational framework for omics data integration. Each
omics layer, and the underlying analytical methodology,
harbors different levels of noise (Arakawa & Tomita 2013).
Sampling directly impacts the appropriate statistical tools
employed and must be defined prior to sampling for a
given study. Bayesian network-based analyses have been
used to robustly integrate multiple high-dimensional
datasets, even with small sample sizes (Mukherjee & Speed
2008, Wang et al. 2015). The Least Absolute Shrinkage and
Selection Operator (LASSO) (Tibshirani 2011) and the Elastic
Net (ENET) (Zou & Hastie 2005) approaches are penalized
regression methods that, after appropriate standardization,
can model more than one type of omics data, which all
must deal with multi-collinearity issues and mitigate the
‘n << p’ problem, i.e., the number of independent samples
(n) is much smaller than the number of measurements per
sample (p). Statistical solutions include the orthogonal
partial least squares (O2PLS), multivariate regression
methods, regularized generalized CCA (RGCCA), principal
component analysis extensions (STATIS, dual-STATIS,
DISTATIS, ANISOSTATIS etc.), multiblock redundancy
analysis (mbRA) and multiblock continuum redundancy
(MCR) (Rajasundaram & Selbig 2016).

Dimension reduction
Multi-omics-derived datasets are high-dimensional in
nature, and their handling can be computationally
intensive. Dimension reduction is one strategy to reduce
the computational burden while also addressing multiple
testing concerns. Tools for dimension reduction that deal

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

with data heterogeneity are essential, but currently limited.
Popular data dimensionality reduction approaches lack
value ratio calculations, low variance and high correlation
filters and random forest, PCA, and backward or forward
feature elimination approaches. PCA is currently the most
widely used dimension reduction approach for omics
studies, as discussed by Meng et al. (2016). Essentially,
dimension reduction techniques for integrative analysis
include multiple coinertia analysis (MCIA), generalized
CCA (gCCA), regularized generalized CCA (rGCCA),
sparse generalized CCA (sGCCA), structuration des
tableaux á trois indices de la statistique (STATIS) X-statis
family of methods (STATIS), higher order generalizations
of SVD and PCA (CANDECOMP/PARAFAC/Tucker3) and
partial triadic analysis, and CIA (statico), all of which are
available as R-packages at CRAN. These methods extract
linear relationships that best explain correlated structures
across datasets and variability both within and between
observations. In addition, they may reveal issues such
as batch effects or outliers in a given dataset. For a more
detailed view on the predictive modeling and analytics
approaches, the readers are advised to consult a recent
review by Kim and Tagkopoulos (2018).

62 :1

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

R34

Bayesian framework addresses noise, and errors from noise
can be taken into account at the beginning of analyses.
Huang et al. (2017) provides a review on currently available
computational resources and algorithms for genomic data
– i.e., genomics, transcriptomics, miRNAomics, ChIPsequencing and gene arrays. These genomic tools are
less than ideal for all types of omics datasets. However,
the methods summarized here are critical for future
development of more robust and less error-prone tools for
integration of diverse omic datasets.
Table 1 summarizes current tools, software and
approaches including the computational platform in
which they can be implemented, their user friendliness,
functionalities, current availability status and links and
associated cited literature.

Current challenges and looking to future
We highlight five essential areas in the integrated omics
workflow which are (i) experimental challenges, (ii)
individual omics datasets, (iii) integration issues, (iv)
data issues and (v) biological knowledge. Figure 2
summarizes the current challenges posed by integrated
omics approaches.

Data integration
Most methods implemented for data integration have relied
on PCA, correlation or Bayesian or non-Bayesian networkbased methods. All approaches estimate instability,
model over-fitting and local convergence. Large standard
errors compromise the predictive advantage provided
by multiple measures. Also, it is difficult to reliably
estimate many parameters and correctly infer associations
from multiple hypotheses tested simultaneously. As a
result, analysis of both single and integrated omics data
is prone to high rates of false positives due to chance
events. Thus, multiple testing must be addressed in the
analytical pipeline to control for both type I error rate (e.g.
Bonferroni corrections, Westfall and Young permutation)
and false-positive rate (e.g. Benjamini–Hochberg).
Bersanelli et al. (2016) provided a detailed review of
current integration tools and underlying mathematics.
They defined four classes of integrative methods for
reduction of multi-omics data: network-free non-Bayesian
(NF-NBY), network-free Bayesian (NF-BY), network-based
non-Bayesian (NB-NBY) and network-based Bayesian (NBBY) methods. Based on current knowledge and tools, they
conclude that for network-based applications, Bayesian
network approaches are a useful compromise between
network analysis and probability theory, where the
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Experimental challenges
Challenges in sample preparation
Numerous reviews have underscored the challenges
for efficient sample preparation from diverse samples
for individual omics studies, ranging from plants,
animals and microbes for genomics (van Dijk et al.
2014), transcriptomics (Chomczynski & Sacchi 2006),
proteomics (Wiśniewski et al. 2009, Erickson et al. 2017)
and metabolomics (Villas‐Bôas et al. 2005, Bruce et al.
2009, Kim & Verpoorte 2010). More focused efforts
are also available such as sample preparation for fecal
metabolomics (Deda et al. 2017), lipidomics (Teo et al.
2015), single-cell genomics (Vitak et al. 2017, Zahn et al.
2017) among others. However, with multi-omics, the
sample amount becomes one of the major bottlenecks,
further challenged by unified extraction strategies
amenable for simultaneous extraction of nucleic acids,
proteins and metabolites from a given matrix without
significant loss. Thus, single tube extraction methods
were proposed to allow for multi-phasic extraction of
the three types of biomolecules as well (Valledor et al.
2014). Not only academic efforts, but commercial kits
are currently being made available to address sample
preparation for integrated omics analysis. For instance,

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

metabolite, protein and lipid extraction (MPLEx) protocol
was proposed to be a robust method that is potentially
applicable to a diverse set of sample types, including cell
cultures, microbial communities and tissues (Nakayasu
et al. 2016). Recently, a simultaneous metabolite, protein,
lipid extraction (SIMPLEX) procedure was proposed as a
novel strategy for the quantitative investigation of lipids,
metabolites and proteins that allowed quantification of
360 lipids, 75 metabolites, and 3327 proteins from only
106 cells (Coman et al. 2016). Some of these methods have
been optimized to yield data from samples to multi-omics
under 48 h (Quinn et al. 2016). However, the unified
sample preparation workflows are in their infancy with
current methods typically providing unequal sample
quality, such as combined extractions of DNA, RNA and
proteins; significant work is required to achieve universal
applications for diverse biological matrices.

Optimizing, documenting and sharing workflows
The success of an integrated omics workflow depends on
a robust experimental design and execution. This includes
the sample handling workflow with optimized sample
collection and preparation protocols that allow analysis
of a given material in a single step for generating multiple
omics datasets. This increases comparability of multiple
omics datasets and limits batch effects and technical
variation issues that often plague high-dimensional data
generation workflows.
It is essential to define and document all steps in
the data handling workflow, including generation of
individual omics datasets and integration of omics
datasets. Handling, storage and analysis of multi-omics
data is computationally intensive, and each step in an
analytical pipeline generates new output files. A critical
aspect of every pipeline is determining which output files
to save and share. These decisions, which take into account
the time and effort required to generate output files for
each step in the workflow, impact the types and amount
of data that must be processed and stored. In turn, data
analytical pipeline implementation requires decisions on
use of cloud infrastructures or local hardware/software for
data storage and processing.
To this end, The Konstanz Information Miner
(KNIME)-based modular environment workflow incor­
porates steps from data preprocessing to statistical analysis
and visualization of omics scale data (Berthold et al.
2009). BioMart, Taverna and the BII Infrastructure are
other workflow management systems, which help in the

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R35

omics data integration and streamlining of the process.
BioMart (http://www.biomart.org) is a query-oriented
database management system developed jointly by the
Ontario Institute for Cancer Research and the European
Bioinformatics Institute. The Taverna workbench (http://
taverna.sourceforge.net) is a free software tool for
designing and executing workflows, created by the
myGrid project (http://www.mygrid.org.uk/tools/taverna).
Toward workflow sharing, myExperiment (https://www.
myexperiment.org/home) is another growing collaborative
environment where scientists can safely publish their
workflows and in silico experiments, share them with
groups and view workflows constructed by others (Goble
et al. 2010). Journals publishing metabolomics studies
may soon require inclusion of the workflow with the
submitted manuscript (Sarpe & Schriemer 2017), which
would significantly improve quality, reproducibility and
utility of datasets.

Data processing
The decision to integrate ‘raw’ datasets to yield a merged
dataset for further processing, or to first process each
independent omics dataset and then merge significant
results for further interpretation, has a significant impact
on the final results obtained. Analysis tools chosen
for integrative efforts also have a significant impact on
outcomes. While several single-omics scale imputation
methods are known (e.g. KNN impute imputation using
k-nearest neighbors, BPCA, singular value decomposition
(SVDimpute), local least squares and iterated local least
squares (iLLS)), missing data imputation is challenging for
multi-omics datasets. Iterative processes for imputation in
a data-dependent manner are also needed. To improve
imputation accuracy, a recent novel multi-omics
imputation approach that integrates multiple correlated
omics datasets by combining estimates of missing values
from individual omics datasets, and concomitantly
imputing multiple missing omics data points by an
iterative algorithm was put forward (Lin et al. 2016).

Time course studies
Sampling time courses are important for understanding
integrated network dynamics. However, this poses
additional issues as response times differ for transcriptomic,
proteomic and metabolomic changes. No tools exist
to compensate for these differences even if assuming a
steady state of -omes within a cell at a given time.

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R36

Figure 2
Five challenges associated with integrated omics which encompass (A) experimental challenges, (B) individual omics datasets, (C) integration issues, (D)
data issues and (E) biological knowledge.

Individual omics datasets – normalization,
transformation of different omics data types
As stated previously, each omics platform has unique
limitations. Normalization, transformation and scaling
approaches in the three major omics fields, i.e.,
transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics, are very
different due to differences in the information included
in a dataset. For example, a zero value in a RNA-Seq-based
transcriptome dataset is treated as non-expression for
that transcript, whereas a zero value in a proteomic or
metabolomic dataset may represent either non-expression
or simply missing data (e.g. for technical reasons, owing
to the complexity of MS-based analyses). Consequently,
imputation of missing values must be addressed differently
for the different types of datasets.
Integration issues – data scaling, false positives
and unknowns
Tools for scaling datasets and addressing false positives
from three or more independent platforms for integration
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

and subsequent analysis have not yet been developed.
Integration is challenging for a wide array of reasons.
Platforms for genomics and transcriptomics vs MS-based
proteomics and metabolomics platforms operate in
different numerical scales, different dynamic ranges of
detection and quantification and different time scales,
for example, the variation in turnover rates of transcripts,
proteins and metabolites. In addition, integration of data
from multiple sources increases difficulty accounting for
false positives in the combined datasets. The decision
to address false positives in individual omics datasets
dramatically impacts results. For instance, until recently,
FDR estimation methods have not been available for
metabolomics datasets due to variability in spectral
matching scoring and non-consensus in the MS databases
(Scheubert et al. 2017), whereas FDR statistical methods
have been available for genomics and transcriptomics for
more than a decade. Additional issues include stringency
of correction where stringent approaches typically rely
on data structure and statistical models compared with
less stringent approaches that include biologically guided

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

integration using tools such as pathway or ontology
enrichment analyses (Khatri et al. 2012).
Currently, there is no consensus for adopting a
single workflow for data integration. Some investigators
have used the WGCNA approach (Langfelder & Horvath
2008) adopted from transcriptomics/microarray analyses
for integrated omics workflows. While this has been
useful, it does not provide a means to address unique
data structures of different omics datasets in biomedical
research (Smith et al. 2007) To this end, recently, an
R-package, MultiDataSet was proposed for encapsulating
multiple data sets with application to -omics data
integration, keeping in mind the different data structure
(list of matrices) generated from individual omics datasets
(Hernandez-Ferrer et al. 2017).
A key strength of unbiased omics approaches is the
ability to identify novel molecules that impact biological
function. A major limitation of omics analyses is the ability
to annotate unknowns. Results from omics workflows
are very generic and some filter out unknowns early in
the analytical pipeline. While some workflows confer
annotation and functional assignment of unknowns
based on coexpression, structural and chemical similarities
or abundance, or all of these, this has not been effective
mapping the majority of unknowns. Moreover, there is
a lack of harmonization, standardization and consensus
among the data analysis communities affiliated with
individual omics platforms for annotation of unknowns,
for instance in case of metabolomics (Spicer et al.
2017a,b). Whereas the genomics and transcriptomics
domains have circumvented these issues with vendorneutral data formats, the MS-based -omics efforts suffer
from these challenges. It is noteworthy that such ‘gold
standard’ data sets are being generated and shared for
the entire proteomics research community. For example,
MS1-based label-free proteomics quadrupole Orbitrap
mass spectrometer data for Escherichia coli digest spiked
into a HeLa digest in four different concentrations is made
available, deposited to ProteomeXchange with identifier
PXD001385 at PRoteomics IDEntifications database
(PRIDE DB) (Shalit et al. 2015). A Sigma UPS1 48 protein
mix (all equimolar proteins) spiked into a yeast digest
background at different concentrations using a Orbitrap
Velos platform running High-Low (FT for MS1 and CID
ion trap MS/MS scans) is made available as PXD001819
at PRIDE DB (Ramus et al. 2016). Similarly, a state-of-theart data-independent acquisition carried out via SWATH
MS Gold Standard data set was made available (Röst et al.
2014) to the proteomics research community. Examples
of such efforts in lipidomics include harmonization and
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R37

interoperability of metabolomics standards (Bowden
et al. 2017) and data sharing, the description, storage and
exchange of NMR-based metabolomics efforts (Schober
et al. 2018). In the absence of robust statistical treatment
and measures, investigators are liable to employ
‘p-hacking’ (investigators select data or statistical analyses
until non-significant results become significant). Omics
efforts are highly susceptible to such practices owing to the
lack of clearly defined ‘gold standard’ analytical pipelines
(Chiu 2017), reiterating the need for appropriate use of
statistical tools and publication of analytical pipelines
with manuscripts.
Data issues – data archiving and sharing
There is a growing urgency for reproducible research using
integrated omics, similar to all disciplines in science. Data
archiving is very important for reproducibility of singular
omics and integrated omics data, including adherence to
Findability, Accessibility, Interoperability and Reusability
(FAIR) principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016). Part of the
solution is a requirement for open sharing of scripts and
codes for these analyses (e.g. R, Python, MATLAB, Java)
using platforms such as GitHub (https://www.github.com)
where developers can share code, review code, manage
projects and build software in collaboration with other
developers. For instance, cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics
(http://cbioportal.org) provides a web resource for
exploring, visualizing and analyzing multi-dimensional
cancer genomics and clinical data (Gao et al. 2013). The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, https://tcgadata.nci.nih.
gov/tcga/) has been generating multimodal genomics,
epigenomics and proteomics data for thousands of tumor
samples from >20 types of cancers (Tomczak et al. 2015).
The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository at the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
archives and freely distributes high‐throughput molecular
abundance data, predominantly gene expression data
(Barrett & Edgar 2006). The most current omics-driven
data are archived at OmicsDI (www.omicsdi.org) that
houses 149,702 datasets, covering 3926 diseases, 2773
tissues from 6428 species (Perez-Riverol et al. 2018).
Thus, although public databases for archiving
individual omics datasets exist (Table 1), no such archive
exists for integrated omics datasets. Data sharing,
especially for large multi-omics studies, can facilitate
availability of resources for further exploratory, training
and post-publication analyses. To this end, sharing of large
datasets using tools like DRYAD (http://datadryad.org;
White et al. 2008) and Fig Share (https://figshare.com;

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Thelwall & Kousha 2016) are very useful for the research
community. Cloud computing technologies may facilitate
dataset sharing where a large number of users can easily
access and process data from a given dataset and share
workflows. Some investigators have begun these efforts
for omics datasets (Pavlovich 2017, Warth et al. 2017). In
addition to routine data sharing, there is also a need for
sharing of ‘gold standard’ datasets from different model
systems such as E. coli, yeast, Arabidopsis, nematode,
mouse, non-human primate models, humans, and so
forth to clearly define strengths and limitations of each of
type of dataset and to provide guidelines on appropriate
analyses. In summary, NCBI, SRA, GEO, TCGA in genomics,
PRIDE DB, PeptideAtlas repository for proteomics, and
MetaboLights, MetabolomicsWorkbench and GNPS for
metabolomics have taken center stage for data archiving,
although standard databases that allow for submission and
retrieval of three or more integrated omic datatypes from a
single repository or single interface are lacking.
Hurdles in implementing multi-omics approaches in
the clinic for diagnostic/prognostic purposes
Multifactorial and polygenic diseases such as cancer,
cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative diseases, cardio­
metabolic diseases, autoimmune disorders and psychiatric
disorders are caused by variation in multiple genes, proteins
and metabolites and often influenced by environmental
factors such as life-style and diet. The promise of the
Human Genome Project was that by identifying all genetic
variants in an individual, it would be possible to identify
variants that caused complex diseases and provide targets
for therapeutic interventions. Based on this premise,
the majority of studies focused on identifying biological
variation that influences complex disease risk have
investigated genetic and epigenetic variation. In addition,
these studies typically measure variation in only one
omic dataset, e.g. DNA sequence variants, variation in
transcript abundance, etc. Despite these research efforts,
the promise is largely still unfulfilled. We now know this is
in large part due to contributions to health and disease by
additional biological variation such as post-translational
modifications of proteins and metabolite abundance.
Thus, there is the need for not only quantification of
different types of biological variants, but integration of
these data in ways that inform our understanding health
and disease which will translate to clinical practice.
There are examples of single metabolite tests (e.g.
glucose, creatinine, bilirubin, lactate and ammonia)
routinely performed in the clinic, such as in newborn
https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R38

screening that has established worldwide (Kayton 2007).
However, capturing an extensive number of biomolecules
for clinical application still presents multiple hurdles
ranging from standardized sample collection to current
costs per sample. As mentioned previously, sample
processing is different for different omic analyses. It is
not practical for clinicians to rapidly process samples
creating multiple aliquots for different types of analyses.
In addition, if limited amounts of patient samples are
available, it may not be feasible to perform multiple
omic analyses using a single sample. Translation of
integrated omics approaches to the clinic will require
streamlining processes for sample collection and storage,
reducing technical variation, improving reproducibility,
standardizing analytical methods, reducing costs and
reducing time for sample analyses (Kopczynski et al.
2017, Wilson et al. 2017). Given that genetic testing is
now beginning to be routinely used in the clinic, as well
as many examples of small molecule assays, it is only a
matter of time before these challenges are addressed
for newer and more comprehensive omics platforms to
contribute essential clinical data that will provide insights
in prognosis and diagnosis of diseases.
Biological knowledge – data interpretation
The largest hurdle for any omics dataset remains ‘making
sense of the data’, which is the 5th ‘V’ of big data –
value. One major objective of multi-dimensional omics
approaches is biomarker discovery – no matter from which
omics layer the key molecules are derived, sensitivity
and specificity of molecular biomarkers are essential for
usefulness in biomedical research and clinical translation
of findings. Interpretation and curation of complex
multi-layered networks is challenging, computationally
and time intensive, and requires detailed knowledge of
the biological system being studied. Studies using an
integrated omics approach without applying biological
knowledge of the system frequently end with nomination
of key molecules and networks for hypothesis testing
that are not biologically relevant. Because validation
of key molecules, inclusion of validation cohorts and
networks (e.g. genes, proteins and/or metabolites) is time
consuming and often challenging, biologically informed
nomination of candidates is essential.

Conclusions
Currently, no single approach exists for processing,
analyzing and interpreting all data from different -omes.

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

The need for multimodal data amalgamation strategies
and development of reproducible, high throughput, user
friendly and effective frameworks must be addressed for
this field to advance. Each standard model organism and
non-standard model organism poses different challenges
due to the uniqueness of metabolite abundance, gene
expression bias, epigenetic regulation and cell-type
specificity of a given omics dataset. Additionally, with
rapid advancement of technologies for genomics,
transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics, the
community needs to embrace challenges posed from
these complex datasets to standardize sample quality,
sample analysis pipelines, data analysis pipelines and data
formats for public data availability. Furthermore, as tools
evolve, they must become user friendly, interoperable
and effective for computationally intensive analyses.
Integrated omics is not just a collage of tools, but a
cohesive paradigm for insightful biological interpretation
of multi-omics datasets that will potentially reveal novel
insights into basic biology, as well as health and disease.

Glossary
Concepts and key terms in this treatise encountered
during implementation of integrated omics workflows.

Omics platform terms
Multi-/integrated-/pan-/poly-/trans-/omics:
Driven by high-dimensional data generated from >2 –omics
technology platforms (usually from multiple types, i.e.,
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics)
for addressing a biological questions in a seamless manner
using bioinformatics and computational workflows and
resources. Steps include-sample preparation, -omics data
acquisition, raw data preprocessing, filtering and quality
control measures, accounting for confounders and
analytical challenges: all of it at individual –omics level,
followed by their integration.
Systems biology: Uses mathematical modeling for
analysis of experimental data to predict the behavior of
biological systems, mostly using high-throughput omics
technology to quantify the cell functionality using mRNA,
proteins and metabolites (but not limited to these) as an
in silico output using computational models.
NGS: Next generation, massively parallel or deep
sequencing encompass modern sequencing efforts that are
high throughput, low cost and accurate and are conducted

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R39

via a single experiment reading millions of nucleotides, as
compared to classical Sanger sequencing methods.
Copy number variation: Structural variation in
the genome where specific regions of DNA are duplicated,
with varying number of repeats.
iTRAQ/TMT tags: Are isobaric peptide labeling
methods used in quantitative proteomics using tandem
MS for determination of protein abundance in multiple
samples in a single experiment.
Untargeted
(label
free)
proteomics/
metabolomics: Unbiased and comprehensive analysis
of all measurable analytes (proteins and metabolites) in a
given sample including unknowns.
SWATH MS: Is a data-independent acquisition method
that complements traditional proteomics experiments
by allowing a complete recording of all fragment ions
detectable in peptide precursors in a given sample.
Statistical terms
Bayesian: Developed by Thomas Bayes, this statistical
logic is applied in decision making and inferential
statistics, which deals with probability inference to predict
future events based on the knowledge of previous events.
Multivariate: Statistical analysis of data collected
on more than one variable that needs to be analyzed
simultaneously where dependence is taken into account.
Dimensionality reduction: Commonly used in
big data, machine learning and statistical approaches, it
allows for reducing the number of dimensions (i.e., the
number of random variables under consideration) by
providing a set of principal variables.
Principal
component
analysis: Statistical
procedure that summarizes high-dimensional data
i.e., constituted of tens of thousands of features where
variables are correlated into a lower-dimensional set of
uncorrelated variables known as principle components.
WGCNA: To allow screening for genes or modules
that are biologically significant, WGCNA defines a
gene significance measure, and thus, enables study
of biological networks based on pairwise correlations
between the variables.
R: Is an open source software environment for
statistical computing and graphics that runs on wide
variety of operating systems.

Declaration of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest that could be
perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of this review.

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from any funding agency in
the public, commercial or not-for-profit sector.

References
Aebersold R & Mann M 2016 Mass-spectrometric exploration of
proteome structure and function. Nature 537 347–355. (https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature19949)
Akavia UD, Litvin O, Kim J, Sanchez-Garcia F, Kotliar D, Causton HC,
Pochanard P, Mozes E, Garraway LA & Pe’er D 2010 An integrated
approach to uncover drivers of cancer. Cell 143 1005–1017. (https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.11.013)
Alexandar V, Nayar PG, Murugesan R, Mary B, Darshana P & Ahmed SS
2015 CardioGenBase: a literature based multi-omics database for
major cardiovascular diseases. PLoS ONE 10 e0143188. (https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0143188)
Anand S, Samuel M, Ang CS, Keerthikumar S & Mathivanan S 2017
Label-based and label-free strategies for protein quantitation. In
Proteome Bioinformatics. Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1549.
Eds S Keerthikumar & S Mathivanan. New York, NY: Humana Press.
(https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-6740-7_4)
Arakawa K & Tomita M 2013 Merging multiple omics datasets in silico:
statistical analyses and data interpretation. Systems Metabolic
Engineering: Methods and Protocols 985 459–470. (https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-62703-299-5_23)
Auffray C, Balling R, Barroso I, Bencze L, Benson M, Bergeron J, BernalDelgado E, Blomberg N Bock C, Conesa A, et al. 2016 Making sense
of big data in health research: towards an EU action plan. Genome
Medicine 8 1. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s13073-016-0323-y)
Aure MR, Steinfeld I, Baumbusch LO, Liestøl K, Lipson D, Nyberg S,
Naume B, Sahlberg KK, Kristensen VN, Børresen-Dale AL, et al. 2013
Identifying in-trans process associated genes in breast cancer by
integrated analysis of copy number and expression data. PLoS ONE 8
53014. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0053014)
Bakalarski CE & Kirkpatrick DS 2016 A biologist’s field guide to
multiplexed quantitative proteomics. Molecular and Cellular Proteomics
15 1489–1497. (https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.O115.056986)
Bantscheff M, Lemeer S, Savitski MM & Kuster B 2012 Quantitative mass
spectrometry in proteomics: critical review update from 2007 to the
present. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 404 939–965. (https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00216-012-6203-4)
Barrett T & Edgar R 2006 Gene Expression Omnibus: microarray data
storage, submission, retrieval, and analysis. Methods in Enzymology
411 352–369. (https://doi.org/10.1016/S0076-6879(06)11019-8)
Bauer C, Stec K, Glintschert A, Gruden K, Schichor C, Or-Guil M,
Selbig J & Schuchhardt J 2015 BioMiner: paving the way for
personalized medicine. Cancer Informatics 14 55. (https://doi.
org/10.4137/CIN.S20910.)
Bayjanov JR, Molenaar D, Tzeneva V, Siezen RJ & van Hijum SA 2012
PhenoLink-a web-tool for linking phenotype to~ omics data for
bacteria: application to gene-trait matching for Lactobacillus
plantarum strains. BMC Genomics 13 1. (https://doi.org/10.1186/14712164-13-170)
Bersanelli M, Mosca E, Remondini D, Giampieri E, Sala C, Castellani G
& Milanesi L 2016 Methods for the integration of multi-omics data:
mathematical aspects. BMC Bioinformatics 17 67. (https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12859-015-0857-9)
Berthold MR, Cebron N, Dill F, Gabriel TR, Kötter T, Meinl T, Ohl P,
Thiel K & Wiswedel B 2009 KNIME-the Konstanz information miner:
version 2.0 and beyond. AcM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 11
26–31. (http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1656274.1656280)
Bertrand D, Chng KR, Sherbaf FG, Kiesel A, Chia BK, Sia YY, Huang SK,
Hoon DS, Liu ET, Hillmer A, et al. 2015 Patient-specific driver gene

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R40

prediction and risk assessment through integrated network analysis
of cancer omics profiles. Nucleic Acids Research 43 e44. (https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gku1393.)
Bowden JA, Heckert A, Ulmer CZ, Jones CM, Koelmel JP, Abdullah L,
Ahonen L, Alnouti Y, Armando A, Asara JM, et al. 2017 Harmonizing
lipidomics: NIST interlaboratory comparison exercise for lipidomics
using standard reference material 1950 metabolites in frozen human
plasma. Journal of Lipid Research 58 2275–2288. (https://doi.
org/10.1194/jlr.M079012)
Bowers RM, Kyrpides NC, Stepanauskas R, Harmon-Smith M, Doud D,
Reddy TBK, Schulz F, Jarett J, Rivers AR, Eloe-Fadrosh EA, et al. 2017
Minimum information about a single amplified genome (MISAG)
and a metagenome-assembled genome (MIMAG) of bacteria and
archaea. Nature Biotechnology 35 725–731. (https://doi.org/10.1038/
nbt.3893)
Box GE & Cox DR 1964 An analysis of transformations. Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 26 211–252.
Brazma A, Hingamp P, Quackenbush J, Sherlock G, Spellman P,
Stoeckert C, Aach J, Ansorge W, Ball CA, Causton HC, et al. 2001
Minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME) –
toward standards for microarray data. Nature Genetics 29 365–371.
(https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1201-365)
Bruce SJ, Tavazzi I, Parisod V, Rezzi S, Kochhar S & Guy PA 2009
Investigation of human blood plasma sample preparation for
performing metabolomics using ultrahigh performance liquid
chromatography/mass spectrometry. Analytical Chemistry 81
3285–3296. (https://doi.org/10.1021/ac8024569)
Buescher JM & Driggers EM 2016 Integration of omics: more than the
sum of its parts. Cancer and Metabolism 4 1. (https://doi.org/10.1186/
s40170-016-0143-y)
Chae H, Lee S, Seo S, Jung D, Chang H, Nephew KP & Kim S 2016
BioVLAB-mCpG-SNP-EXPRESS: a system for multi-level and multiperspective analysis and exploration of DNA methylation, sequence
variation (SNPs), and gene expression from multi-omics data.
Methods 111 64–71. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymeth.2016.07.019)
Chari R, Coe BP, Vucic EA, Lockwood WW & Lam WL 2010 An
integrative multi-dimensional genetic and epigenetic strategy to
identify aberrant genes and pathways in cancer. BMC Systems Biology
4 67–10. (https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-0509-4-67)
Chen B-J, Causton HC, Mancenido D, Goddard NL, Perlstein EO &
Pe’er D 2009 Harnessing gene expression to identify the genetic
basis of drug resistance. Molecular Systems Biology 5 310. (https://doi.
org/10.1038/msb.2009.69)
Chiu K, Grundy Q & Bero L 2017 ‘Spin’in published biomedical
literature: a methodological systematic review. PLoS Biology 15
e2002173. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2002173)
Chomczynski P & Sacchi N 2006 The single-step method of RNA
isolation by acid guanidinium thiocyanate–phenol–chloroform
extraction: twenty-something years on. Nature Protocols 1 581.
(https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.83)
Coman C, Solari FA, Hentschel A, Sickmann A, Zahedi RP & Ahrends R
2016 Simultaneous metabolite, protein, lipid extraction (SIMPLEX): a
combinatorial multimolecular omics approach for systems biology.
Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 15 1453–1466. (https://doi.
org/10.1074/mcp.M115.053702)
Costa-Silva J, Domingues D & Lopes FM 2017 RNA-Seq differential
expression analysis: an extended review and a software tool. PLoS
ONE 12 e0190152. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0190152)
Cox LA, Glenn JP, Spradling KD, Nijland MJ, Garcia R, Nathanielsz PW
& Ford SP 2012 A genome resource to address mechanisms of
developmental programming: determination of the fetal sheep heart
transcriptome. Journal of Physiology 590 2873–2884. (https://doi.
org/10.1113/jphysiol.2011.222398)
Cun Y & Fröhlich H 2014 Netclass: an R-package for network based,
integrative biomarker signature discovery. Bioinformatics 30
1325–1326. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btu025)

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Davidson RL, Weber RJ, Liu H, Sharma-Oates A & Viant MR 2016
Galaxy-M: a Galaxy workflow for processing and analyzing direct
infusion and liquid chromatography mass spectrometry-based
metabolomics data. GigaScience 5 1. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s13742016-0115-8)
De Tayrac M, Lê S, Aubry M, Mosser J & Husson F 2009 Simultaneous
analysis of distinct Omics datasets with integration of biological
knowledge: Multiple Factor Analysis approach. BMC Genomics 10 32.
(https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-10-32)
Deda O, Chatziioannou AC, Fasoula S, Palachanis D, Raikos Ν,
Theodoridis GA & Gika HG 2017 Sample preparation optimization
in fecal metabolic profiling. Journal of Chromatography B 1047
115–123. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchromb.2016.06.047)
Desiere F, Deutsch EW, King NL, Nesvizhskii AI, Mallick P, Eng J,
Chen S, Eddes J, Loevenich SN & Aebersold R 2006 The PeptideAtlas
project. Nucleic Acids Research 34 D655–D658. (https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkj040)
Deutsch EW, Orchard S, Binz PA, Bittremieux W, Eisenacher M,
Hermjakob H, Kawano S, Lam H, Mayer G, Menschaert G, et al. 2017
Proteomics standards initiative: fifteen years of progress and future
work. Journal of Proteome Research 16 4288–4298. (https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00370)
Erickson BK, Rose CM, Braun CR, Erickson AR, Knott J, McAlister GC,
Wühr M, Paulo JA, Everley RA & Gygi SP 2017 A strategy to combine
sample multiplexing with targeted proteomics assays for highthroughput protein signature characterization. Molecular Cell 65
361–370. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2016.12.005)
Fan J, Saha S, Barker G, Heesom KJ, Ghali F, Jones AR, Matthews DA &
Bessant C 2015 Galaxy Integrated Omics: web-based standardscompliant workflows for proteomics informed by transcriptomics.
Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 14 3087–3093. (https://doi.
org/10.1074/mcp.O115.048777)
Fiehn O, Robertson D, Griffin J, van der Werf M, Nikolau B, Morrison N,
Sumner LW, Goodacre R, Hardy NW, Taylor C, et al. 2007 The
metabolomics standards initiative (MSI). Metabolomics 3 175–178.
(https://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-007-0070-6)
Field D, Garrity G, Gray T, Morrison N, Selengut J, Sterk P, Tatusova T,
Thomson N, Allen MJ, Angiuoli SV, et al. 2008 The minimum
information about a genome sequence (MIGS) specification. Nature
Biotechnology 26 541–547. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1360)
Fisch KM, Meißner T, Gioia L, Ducom JC, Carland TM, Loguercio S &
Su AI 2015 Omics Pipe: a community-based framework for
reproducible multi-omics data analysis. Bioinformatics 31 1724–1728.
(https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv061)
Fondi M & Liò P 2015 Multi-omics and metabolic modelling pipelines:
challenges and tools for systems microbiology. Microbiological
Research 171 52–64. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2015.01.003)
Forsberg EM, Huan T, Rinehart D, Benton HP, Warth B, Hilmers B &
Siuzdak G 2018 Data processing, multi-omic pathway mapping, and
metabolite activity analysis using XCMS Online. Nature Protocols 13
633. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2017.151)
Fukushima A & Kusano M 2013 Recent progress in the development of
metabolome databases for plant systems biology. Frontiers in Plant
Science 4 73. (https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2013.00073)
Gao J, Aksoy BA, Dogrusoz U, Dresdner G, Gross B, Sumer SO, Sun Y,
Jacobsen A, Sinha R, Larsson E, et al. 2013 Integrative analysis of
complex cancer genomics and clinical profiles using the cBioPortal.
Science Signaling 6 pl1. (https://doi.org/10.1126/scisignal.2004088)
García-Alcalde F, García-López F, Dopazo J & Conesa A 2011 Paintomics:
a web based tool for the joint visualization of transcriptomics and
metabolomics data. Bioinformatics 27 137–139. (https://doi.
org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq594)
Gehlenborg N, O’Donoghue SI, Baliga NS, Goesmann A, Hibbs MA,
Kitano H, Kohlbacher O, Neuweger H, Schneider R, Tenenbaum D,
et al. 2010 Visualization of omics data for systems biology. Nature
Methods 7 S56–S68. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1436)

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R41

Goble CA, Bhagat J, Aleksejevs S, Cruickshank D, Michaelides D,
Newman D, Borkum M, Bechhofer S, Roos M, Li P, et al. 2010
myExperiment: a repository and social network for the sharing of
bioinformatics workflows. Nucleic Acids Research 38 W677–W682.
(https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkq429)
Gomez-Cabrero D, Abugessaisa I, Maier D, Teschendorff A,
Merkenschlager M, Gisel A, Ballestar E, Bongcam-Rudloff E,
Conesa A & Tegnér J 2014 Data integration in the era of omics:
current and future challenges. BMC Systems Biology 8 1. (https://doi.
org/10.1186/1752-0509-8-S2-I1)
Guhlin J, Silverstein KA, Zhou P, Tiffin P & Young ND 2017 ODG: Omics
database generator-a tool for generating, querying, and analyzing multiomics comparative databases to facilitate biological understanding.
BMC Bioinformatics 18 367. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-017-1777-7)
Heintz-Buschart A, May P, Laczny CC, Lebrun LA, Bellora C, Krishna A,
Wampach L, Schneider JG, Hogan A, de Beaufort C, et al. 2016
Integrated multi-omics of the human gut microbiome in a case
study of familial type 1 diabetes. Nature Microbiology 2 16180.
(https://doi.org/10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.180)
Henry VJ, Bandrowski AE, Pepin AS, Gonzalez BJ & Desfeux A 2014
OMICtools: an informative directory for multi-omic data analysis.
Database 2014 bau069. (https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bau069)
Hernandez-Ferrer C, Ruiz-Arenas C, Beltran-Gomila A & González JR
2017 MultiDataSet: an R package for encapsulating multiple data sets
with application to omic data integration. BMC Bioinformatics 18 36.
(https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-016-1455-1)
Huang S, Chaudhary K & Garmire LX 2017 More is better: recent
progress in multi-omics data integration methods. Frontiers in
Genetics 8 84. (https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2017.00084)
Huttenhower C, Mutungu KT, Indik N, Yang W, Schroeder M, Forman JJ,
Troyanskaya OG & Coller HA 2009 Detailing regulatory networks
through large scale data integration. Bioinformatics 25 3267–3274.
(https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp588)
Jang Y, Yu N, Seo J, Kim S & Lee S 2016 MONGKIE: an integrated tool
for network analysis and visualization for multi-omics data. Biology
Direct 11 10. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s13062-016-0112-y)
Jiang Y, Shi X, Zhao Q, Krauthammer M, Rothberg BEG & Ma S 2016
Integrated analysis of multidimensional omics data on cutaneous
melanoma prognosis. Genomics 107 223–230. (https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ygeno.2016.04.005)
Jung D, Kim B, Freishtat RJ, Giri M, Hoffman E & Seo J 2015 miRTarVis: an
interactive visual analysis tool for microRNA-mRNA expression profile
data. BMC Proceedings 9 1. (https://doi.org/10.1186/1753-6561-9-S6-S2)
Kale NS, Haug K, Conesa P, Jayseelan K, Moreno P, Rocca‐Serra P,
Nainala VC, Spicer RA, Williams M, Li X, et al. 2016 MetaboLights:
an open‐access database repository for metabolomics data. Current
Protocols in Bioinformatics 53 1–18. (https://doi.
org/10.1002/0471250953.bi1413s53)
Kamburov A, Cavill R, Ebbels TM, Herwig R & Keun HC 2011 Integrated
pathway-level analysis of transcriptomics and metabolomics data
with IMPaLA. Bioinformatics 27 2917–2918. (https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btr499)
Kamoun A, Idbaih A, Dehais C, Elarouci N, Carpentier C, Letouzé E,
Colin C, Mokhtari K, Jouvet A, Uro-Coste E, et al. 2016 Integrated
multi-omics analysis of oligodendroglial tumours identifies three
subgroups of 1p/19q co-deleted gliomas. Nature Communications 7
11263. (https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11263)
Kato H, Takahashi S & Saito K 2011 Omics and integrated omics for the
promotion of food and nutrition science. Journal of Traditional and
Complementary Medicine 1 25–30. (https://doi.org/10.1016/S22254110(16)30053-0)
Kayton A 2007 Newborn screening: a literature review. Neonatal Network
26 85–95. (https://doi.org/10.1891/0730-0832.26.2.85)
Khatri P, Sirota M & Butte AJ 2012 Ten years of pathway analysis:
current approaches and outstanding challenges. PLoS Computational
Biology 8 e1002375. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002375)

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Kim HK & Verpoorte R 2010 Sample preparation for plant
metabolomics. Phytochemical Analysis 21 4–13. (https://doi.
org/10.1002/pca.1188)
Kim M & Tagkopoulos I 2018 Data integration and predictive modeling
methods for multi-omics datasets. Molecular Omics 14 8–25.(https://
doi.org/10.1039/C7MO00051K)
Kim M, Rai N, Zorraquino V & Tagkopoulos I 2016 Multi-omics
integration accurately predicts cellular state in unexplored
conditions for Escherichia coli. Nature Communications 7 13090.
(https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13090)
Kirk P, Griffin JE, Savage RS, Ghahramani Z & Wild DL 2012 Bayesian
correlated clustering to integrate multiple datasets. Bioinformatics 28
3290–3297. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bts595)
Klein J, Jupp S, Moulos P, Fernandez M, Buffin-Meyer B, Casemayou A,
Chaaya R, Charonis A, Bascands JL, Stevens R, et al. 2012 The
KUPKB: a novel Web application to access multiomics data on
kidney disease. FASEB Journal 26 2145–2153. (https://doi.
org/10.1096/fj.11-19438)
Kohl M, Megger DA, Trippler M, Meckel H, Ahrens M, Bracht T, Weber F,
Hoffmann AC, Baba HA, Sitek B, et al. 2014 A practical data
processing workflow for multi-OMICS projects. Biochimica et
Biophysica Acta (BBA): Proteins and Proteomics 1844 52–62. (https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2013.02.029)
Kopczynski D, Coman C, Zahedi RP, Lorenz K, Sickmann A & Ahrends R
2017 Multi-OMICS: a critical technical perspective on integrative
lipidomics approaches. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA): Molecular
and Cell Biology of Lipids 1862 808–811. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bbalip.2017.02.003)
Krämer A, Green J, Pollard J & Tugendreich S 2014 Causal analysis
approaches in ingenuity pathway analysis. Bioinformatics 30
523–530. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btt703)
Krishnan KC, Kurt Z, Barrere-Cain R, Sabir S, Das A, Floyd R, Vergnes L,
Zhao Y, Che N, Charugundla S, et al. 2018 Integration of multiomics data from mouse diversity panel highlights mitochondrial
dysfunction in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Cell Systems 6
103–115. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2017.12.006)
Kuo TC, Tian TF & Tseng YJ 2013 3Omics: a web-based systems biology
tool for analysis, integration and visualization of human
transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic data. BMC Systems
Biology 7 64. (https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-0509-7-64)
Langfelder P & Horvath S 2008 WGCNA: an R package for weighted
correlation network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9 559. (https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2105-9-559)
Lappalainen T, Sammeth M, Friedländer MR, AC‘t Hoen P, Monlong J,
Rivas MA, Gonzalez-Porta M, Kurbatova N, Griebel T, Ferreira PG,
et al. 2013 Transcriptome and genome sequencing uncovers
functional variation in humans. Nature 501 506–511. (https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature12531)
Lê Cao KA, González I & Déjean S 2009 integrOmics: an R package to
unravel relationships between two omics datasets. Bioinformatics 25
2855–2856. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp515)
Leday GG & van de Wiel MA 2013 PLRS: a flexible tool for the joint
analysis of DNA copy number and mRNA expression data.
Bioinformatics 29 1081–1082. (https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btt082)
Li W, Zhang S, Liu C-C & Zhou XJ 2012 Identifying multi-layer gene
regulatory modules from multi-dimensional genomic data.
Bioinformatics 28 2458–2466. (https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/bts476)
Li Y, Wu FX & Ngom A 2016 A review on machine learning principles
for multi-view biological data integration. Briefings in Bioinformatics
19 325–340. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbw113)
Li H, Wang X, Rukina D, Huang Q, Lin T, Sorrentino V, Zhang H,
Sleiman MB, Arends D, McDaid A, et al. 2017 An integrated systems
genetics and omics toolkit to probe gene function. Cell Systems 6
90–102. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2017.10.016)

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R42

Libbrecht MW & Noble WS 2015 Machine learning applications in
genetics and genomics. Nature Reviews Genetics 16 321–332. (https://
doi.org/10.1038/nrg3920)
Lin D, Zhang J, Li J, Xu C, Deng HW & Wang YP 2016 An integrative
imputation method based on multi-omics datasets. BMC
Bioinformatics 17 247. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-016-1122-6)
Liu Y, Devescovi V, Chen S & Nardini C 2013 Multilevel omic data
integration in cancer cell lines: advanced annotation and emergent
properties. BMC Systems Biology 7 14. (https://doi.org/10.1186/17520509-7-14)
Liu G, Dong C & Liu L 2016 Integrated multiple ‘-omics’ data reveal
subtypes of hepatocellular carcinoma. PLoS ONE 11 e0165457.
(https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0165457)
Louhimo R & Hautaniemi S 2011 Cnamet: an R package for integrating
copy number, methylation and expression data. Bioinformatics 27
887–888. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr019)
Meng C, Kuster B, Culhane AC & Gholami AM 2014 A multivariate
approach to the integration of multi-omics datasets. BMC
Bioinformatics 15 162. (https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-15-162)
Meng C, Zeleznik OA, Thallinger GG, Kuster B, Gholami AM &
Culhane AC 2016 Dimension reduction techniques for the
integrative analysis of multi-omics data. Briefings in Bioinformatics 17
628–641. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbv108)
Menichetti G, Remondini D, Panzarasa P, Mondragón RJ & Bianconi G
2014 Weighted multiplex networks. PLoS ONE 9 e97857. (https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0097857)
Menon V 2017 Clustering single cells: a review of approaches on highand low-depth single-cell RNA-seq data. Briefings in Functional
Genomics. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bfgp/elx044)
Merelli I, Lió P & Milanesi L 2013 Nuchart: an R package to study gene
spatial neighbourhoods with multi-omics annotations. PLoS ONE 8
75146. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0075146)
Min S, Lee B & Yoon S 2016 Deep learning in bioinformatics. Briefings in
Bioinformatics 18 851–869. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbw068)
Misra BB & van der Hooft JJ 2016 Updates in metabolomics tools and
resources: 2014–2015. Electrophoresis 37 86–110. (https://doi.
org/10.1002/elps.201500417)
Misra BB 2018 New tools and resources in metabolomics: 2016–2017.
Electrophoresis 39 909–923. (https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.201700441)
Misra BB, Fahrmann JF & Grapov D 2017 Review of emerging
metabolomic tools and resources: 2015–2016. Electrophoresis 38
2257–2274. (https://doi.org/10.1002/elps.201700110)
Mochida K & Shinozaki K 2011 Advances in omics and bioinformatics
tools for systems analyses of plant functions. Plant and Cell
Physiology 52 2017–2038. (https://doi.org/10.1093/pcp/pcr153)
Montague E, Stanberry L, Higdon R, Janko I, Lee E, Anderson N,
Choiniere J, Stewart E, Yandl G, Broomall W, et al. 2014 MOPED 2.5.
An integrated multi-omics resource: multi-omics profiling expression
database now includes transcriptomics data. OMICS: A Journal of
Integrative Biology 18 335–343. (https://doi.org/10.1089/
omi.2014.0061)
Mosca E & Milanesi L 2013 Network-based analysis of omics with multiobjective optimization. Molecular Biosystems 9 2971–2980. (https://
doi.org/10.1039/c3mb70327d)
Mukherjee S & Speed TP 2008 Network inference using informative
priors. PNAS 105 14313–14318. (https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0802272105)
Muller EE, Pinel N, Laczny CC, Hoopmann MR, Narayanasamy S,
Lebrun LA, Roume H, Lin J, May P, Hicks ND, et al. 2014
Community-integrated omics links dominance of a microbial
generalist to fine-tuned resource usage. Nature Communications 5
5603. (https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6603)
Muqaku B, Eisinger M, Meier SM, Tahir A, Pukrop T, Haferkamp S,
Slany A, Reichle A & Gerner C 2017 Multi-omics analysis of serum
samples demonstrates reprogramming of organ functions via
systemic calcium mobilization and platelet activation in metastatic

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

melanoma. Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 16 86–99. (https://doi.
org/10.1074/mcp.M116.063313)
Nakayasu ES, Nicora CD, Sims AC, Burnum-Johnson KE, Kim YM,
Kyle JE, Matzke MM, Shukla AK, Chu RK, Schepmoes AA, et al. 2016
MPLEx: a robust and universal protocol for single-sample integrative
proteomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic analyses. MSystems 1
e00043-16. (https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00043-16)
Nibbe RK, Koyutürk M & Chance MR 2010 An integrative-omics
approach to identify functional sub-networks in human colorectal
cancer. PLoS Computational Biology 6 e1000639. (https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000639)
Oveland E, Muth T, Rapp E, Martens L, Berven FS & Barsnes H 2015
Viewing the proteome: how to visualize proteomics data? Proteomics
15 1341–1355. (https://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201400412)
Palermo G, Piraino P & Zucht HD 2009 Performance of PLS regression
coefficients in selecting variables for each response of a multivariate
PLS for omics-type data. Advances and Applications in Bioinformatics
and Chemistry 2 57. (https://doi.org/10.2147/AABC.S3619)
Parkhomenko E, Tritchler D & Beyene J 2009 Sparse canonical
correlation analysis with application to genomic data integration.
Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology 8 1–34.
(https://doi.org/10.2202/1544-6115.1406)
Pathak RR & Dave V 2014 Integrating omics technologies to study
pulmonary physiology and pathology at the systems level. Cellular
Physiology and Biochemistry 33 1239–1260. (https://doi.
org/10.1159/000358693)
Pavel AB, Sonkin D & Reddy A 2016 Integrative modeling of multiomics data to identify cancer drivers and infer patient-specific gene
activity. BMC Systems Biology 10 1. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s12918016-0260-9)
Pavlopoulos GA, Malliarakis D, Papanikolaou N, Theodosiou T,
Enright AJ & Iliopoulos I 2015 Visualizing genome and systems
biology: technologies, tools, implementation techniques and trends,
past, present and future. GigaScience 4 1–27. (https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13742-015-0077-2)
Pavlovich M 2017 Computing in biotechnology: omics and beyond.
Trends in biotechnology 35 pp.479–480. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tibtech.2017.03.011)
Perez-Riverol Y, Zorin A, Dass G, Glonț M, Vizcaino JA, Jarnuczak A,
Petryszak R, Ping P & Hermjakob H 2018 Quantifying the impact of
public omics data. BioRxiv 282517. (https://doi.org/10.1101/282517)
Proffitt JM, Glenn J, Cesnik AJ, Jadhav A, Shortreed MR, Smith LM,
Kavanagh K, Cox LA & Olivier M 2017 Proteomics in non-human
primates: utilizing RNA-Seq data to improve protein identification by
mass spectrometry in vervet monkeys. BMC Genomics 18 877.
(https://doi.org/10.1186/s12864-017-4279-0)
Pruitt KD, Tatusova T & Maglott DR 2006 NCBI reference sequences
(RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes,
transcripts and proteins. Nucleic Acids Research 35 D61–D65. (https://
doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkl842)
Quinn RA, Navas-Molina JA, Hyde ER, Song SJ, Vázquez-Baeza Y,
Humphrey G, Gaffney J, Minich JJ, Melnik AV, Herschend J, et al.
2016 From sample to multi-omics conclusions in under 48 hours.
mSystems 1 e00038-16. (https://doi.org/10.1128/mSystems.00038-16)
Rajasundaram D & Selbig J 2016 More effort – more results: recent
advances in integrative ‘omics’ data analysis. Current Opinion in Plant
Biology 30 57–61. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2015.12.010)
Ramos M, Schiffer L, Re A, Azhar R, Basunia A, Rodriguez C, Chan T,
Chapman P, Davis SR, Gomez-Cabrero D, et al. 2017 software for the
integration of multiomics experiments in bioconductor. Cancer Research
77 e39–e42. (https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-17-0344)
Ramus C, Hovasse A, Marcellin M, Hesse AM, Mouton-Barbosa E,
Bouyssié D, Vaca S, Carapito C, Chaoui K, Bruley C, et al. 2016
Benchmarking quantitative label-free LC–MS data processing
workflows using a complex spiked proteomic standard dataset. Journal
of Proteomics 132 51–62. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2015.11.011)

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R43

Ritchie MD, Holzinger ER, Li R, Pendergrass SA & Kim D 2015 Methods
of integrating data to uncover genotype-phenotype interactions.
Nature Reviews Genetics 16 85–97. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3868)
Rohart F, Gautier B, Singh A & Lê Cao K-A 2017 mixOmics: an R
package for ‘omics feature selection and multiple data integration.
PLoS Computational Biology 13 e1005752. (https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1005752)
Ronan T, Qi Z & Naegle KM 2016 Avoiding common pitfalls when
clustering biological data. Science Signaling 9 re6. (https://doi.
org/10.1126/scisignal.aad1932)
Röst HL, Rosenberger G, Navarro P, Gillet L, Miladinović SM,
Schubert OT, Wolski W, Collins BC, Malmström J, Malmström L,
et al. 2014 OpenSWATH enables automated, targeted analysis of
data-independent acquisition MS data. Nature Biotechnology 32
219–223. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2841)
Sarpe V & Schriemer DC 2017 Supporting metabolomics with adaptable
software: design architectures for the end-user. Current Opinion in
Biotechnology 43 110–117. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
copbio.2016.11.001)
Savage RS, Ghahramani Z, Griffin JE, de la Cruz BJ & Wild DL 2010
Discovering transcriptional modules by Bayesian data integration.
Bioinformatics 26 158–167. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btq210)
Scheubert K, Hufsky F, Petras D, Wang M, Nothias LF, Dührkop K,
Bandeira N, Dorrestein PC & Böcker S 2017 Significance estimation
for large scale metabolomics annotations by spectral matching.
Nature Communications 8 1494. (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-01701318-5)
Schober D, Jacob D, Wilson M, Cruz JA, Marcu A, Grant JR, Moing A,
Deborde C, de Figueiredo LF, Haug K, et al. 2018 nmrML: a
community supported open data standard for the description,
storage, and exchange of NMR data. Analytical Chemistry 90
649–656. (https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.analchem.7b02795)
Shalit T, Elinger D, Savidor A, Gabashvili A & Levin Y 2015 MS1-based
label-free proteomics using a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer.
Journal of Proteome Research 14 1979–1986. (https://doi.org/10.1021/
pr501045)
Shen R, Olshen AB & Ladanyi M 2009 Integrative clustering of multiple
genomic data types using a joint latent variable model with
application to breast and lung cancer subtype analysis. Bioinformatics
25 2906–2912. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp543)
Shendure J, Balasubramanian S, Church GM, Gilbert W, Rogers J,
Schloss JA & Waterston RH 2017 DNA sequencing at 40: past,
present and future. Nature 550 345–353. (https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature24286)
Shu L, Zhao Y, Kurt Z, Byars S, Tukiainen T, Kettunen J, Ripatti S,
Zhang B, Inouye M, Makinen VP, et al. 2016 Mergeomics: integration
of diverse genomics resources to identify pathogenic perturbations to
biological systems. BMC Genomics 17 874. (https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12864-016-3198-9)
Slenter DN, Kutmon M, Hanspers K, Riutta A, Windsor J, Nunes N,
Mélius J, Cirillo E, Coort SL, Digles D, et al. 2018 WikiPathways: a
multifaceted pathway database bridging metabolomics to other
omics research. Nucleic Acids Research 46 D661–D667 (https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkx1064)
Smith B, Ashburner M, Rosse C, Bard J, Bug W, Ceusters W, Goldberg LJ,
Eilbeck K, Ireland A, Mungall CJ, et al. 2007 The OBO Foundry:
coordinated evolution of ontologies to support biomedical data
integration. Nature Biotechnology 25 1251–1255. (https://doi.
org/10.1038/nbt1346)
Song WM & Zhang B 2015 Multiscale embedded gene co-expression
network analysis. PLoS Computational Biology 11 e1004574. (https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004574)
Spicer RA, Salek R & Steinbeck C 2017a Comment: a decade after the
metabolomics standards initiative it’s time for a revision. Scientific
Data 4 170138. (https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.138)

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Spicer RA, Salek R & Steinbeck C 2017b Compliance with minimum
information guidelines in public metabolomics repositories. Scientific
Data 4 170137. (https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.137)
Srivastava V, Obudulu O, Bygdell J, Löfstedt T, Rydén P, Nilsson R,
Ahnlund M, Johansson A, Jonsson P, Freyhult E, et al. 2013 OnPLS
integration of transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomic data
shows multi-level oxidative stress responses in the cambium of
transgenic hipI-superoxide dismutase Populus plants. BMC Genomics
14 1. (https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2164-14-893)
Stanberry L, Mias GI, Haynes W, Higdon R, Snyder M & Kolker E 2013
Integrative analysis of longitudinal metabolomics data from a
personal multi-omics profile. Metabolites 3 741–3760. (https://doi.
org/10.3390/metabo3030741)
Stöckel D, Kehl T, Trampert P, Schneider L, Backes C, Ludwig N,
Gerasch A, Kaufmann M, Gessler M, Graf N, et al. 2016 Multi-omics
enrichment analysis using the GeneTrail2 journal service.
Bioinformatics 32 1502–1508. (https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/btv770)
Sud M, Fahy E, Cotter D, Azam K, Vadivelu I, Burant C, Edison A,
Fiehn O, Higashi R, Nair KS, et al. 2015 Metabolomics Workbench:
an international repository for metabolomics data and metadata,
metabolite standards, protocols, tutorials and training, and analysis
tools. Nucleic Acids Research 44 D463–D470. (https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gkv1042)
Sumner LW, Amberg A, Barrett D, Beale MH, Beger R, Daykin CA, Fan
TWM, Fiehn O, Goodacre R, Griffin JL et al. 2007. Proposed
minimum reporting standards for chemical analysis. Metabolomics 3
211–221. (https://doi.org/10.1007/s11306-007-0082-2)
Taylor CF, Paton NW, Lilley KS, Binz PA, Julian RK, Jones AR, Zhu W,
Apweiler R, Aebersold R, Deutsch EW, et al. 2007 The minimum
information about a proteomics experiment (MIAPE). Nature
Biotechnology 25 887–893. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt1329)
Teo CC, Chong WP, Tan E, Basri NB, Low ZJ & Ho YS 2015 Advances in
sample preparation and analytical techniques for lipidomics study of
clinical samples. Trends in Analytical Chemistry 66 1–8. (https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.trac.2014.10.010)
Thaiss CA, Levy M, Korem T, Dohnalová L, Shapiro H, Jaitin DA,
David E, Winter DR, Gury-BenAri M, Tatirovsky E, et al. 2016
Microbiota diurnal rhythmicity programs host transcriptome
oscillations. Cell 167 1495–1510. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cell.2016.11.003)
Thelwall M & Kousha K 2016 Figshare: a universal repository for
academic resource sharing?. Online Information Review 40 333–346.
(https://doi.org/10.1108/OIR-06-2015-0190)
Thimm O, Bläsing O, Gibon Y, Nagel A, Meyer S, Krüger P, Selbig J,
Müller LA, Rhee SY & Stitt M 2004 Mapman: a user‐driven tool to
display genomics datasets onto diagrams of metabolic pathways and
other biological processes. Plant Journal 37 914–939. (https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-313X.2004.02016.x)
Tibshirani R 2011 Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso: a
retrospective. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical
Methodology) 73 273–282. (https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2011.00771.x)
Tisoncik-Go J, Gasper DJ, Kyle JE, Eisfeld AJ, Selinger C, Hatta M,
Morrison J, Korth MJ, Zink EM, Kim YM, et al. 2016 Integrated
omics analysis of pathogenic host responses during pandemic H1N1
influenza virus infection: the crucial role of lipid metabolism. Cell
Host and Microbe 19 254–266. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chom.2016.01.002)
Tomczak K, Czerwińska P & Wiznerowicz M 2015 The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA): an immeasurable source of knowledge. Contemporary
Oncology 19 A68.
Tuncbag N, McCallum S, Huang S-SC & Fraenkel E 2012 Steinernet: a
journal server for integrating ‘omic’ data to discover hidden
components of response pathways. Nucleic Acids Research 40
505–509. (https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks445)

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R44

Tuncbag N, Gosline SJ, Kedaigle A, Soltis AR, Gitter A & Fraenkel E 2016
Network-based interpretation of diverse high-throughput datasets
through the Omics Integrator software package. PLoS Computational
Biology 12 e1004879. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004879)
Valledor L, Escandón M, Meijón M, Nukarinen E, Cañal MJ &
Weckwerth W 2014 A universal protocol for the combined isolation
of metabolites, DNA, long RNAs, small RNAs, and proteins from
plants and microorganisms. Plant Journal 79 173–180. (https://doi.
org/10.1111/tpj.12546)
van Dijk EL, Jaszczyszyn Y & Thermes C 2014 Library preparation
methods for next-generation sequencing: tone down the bias.
Experimental Cell Research 322 12–20. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
yexcr.2014.01.008)
Vaske CJ, Benz SC, Sanborn JZ, Earl D, Szeto C, Zhu J, Haussler D &
Stuart JM 2010 Inference of patient-specific pathway activities
from multi-dimensional cancer genomics data using paradigm.
Bioinformatics 26 237–245. (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btq182)
Villas‐Bôas SG, Højer‐Pedersen J, Åkesson M, Smedsgaard J & Nielsen J
2005 Global metabolite analysis of yeast: evaluation of sample
preparation methods. Yeast 22 1155–1169.
Vitak SA, Torkenczy KA, Rosenkrantz JL, Fields AJ, Christiansen L,
Wong MH, Carbone L, Steemers FJ & Adey A 2017 Sequencing
thousands of single-cell genomes with combinatorial indexing.
Nature Methods 14 302. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4154)
Vizcaíno JA, Côté RG, Csordas A, Dianes JA, Fabregat A, Foster JM,
Griss J, Alpi E, Birim M, Contell J, et al. 2013 The PRoteomics
IDEntifications (PRIDE) database and associated tools: status in 2013.
Nucleic Acids Research. 41 D1063–D1069. (https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gks1262)
Vizcaíno JA, Deutsch EW, Wang R, Csordas A, Reisinger F, Rios D,
Dianes JA, Sun Z, Farrah T, Bandeira N, et al. 2014 ProteomeXchange
provides globally coordinated proteomics data submission and
dissemination. Nature Biotechnology 32 223–226. (https://doi.
org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq182)
Wang D & Gu J 2016 Integrative clustering methods of multi-omics data
for molecule-based cancer classifications. Quantitative Biology 4
58–67. (https://doi.org/10.1007/s40484-016-0063-4)
Wang J, Zuo Y, Man YG, Avital I, Stojadinovic A, Liu M, Yang X,
Varghese RS, Tadesse MG & Ressom HW 2015 Pathway and network
approaches for identification of cancer signature markers from omics
data. Journal of Cancer 6 54–65. (https://doi.org/10.7150/jca.10631)
Wang M, Carver JJ, Phelan VV, Sanchez LM, Garg N, Peng Y,
Nguyen DD, Watrous J, Kapono CA, Luzzatto-Knaan T, et al. 2016
Sharing and community curation of mass spectrometry data with
Global Natural Products Social Molecular Networking. Nature
Biotechnology 34 828–837. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3597)
Wanichthanarak K, Fahrmann JF & Grapov D 2015 Genomic,
proteomic, and metabolomic data integration strategies. Biomarker
Insights 10 1–6. (https://doi.org/10.4137/BMI.S29511)
Warth B, Levin N, Rinehart D, Teijaro J, Benton HP & Siuzdak G 2017
Metabolizing data in the cloud. Trends in Biotechnology 35 481–483.
(https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.12.010)
Weill N, Lisi V, Scott N, Dallaire P, Pelloux J & Major F 2015
MiRBooking simulates the stoichiometric mode of action of
microRNAs. Nucleic Acids Research 43 6730–6738. (https://doi.
org/10.1093/nar/gkv619)
White HC, Carrier S, Thompson A, Greenberg J & Scherle R 2008 The
Dryad Data Repository: a Singapore framework metadata
architecture in a DSpace Environment. In Dublin Core Conference,
pp 157–162.
Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M, Aalbersberg IJ, Appleton G, Axton M,
Baak A, Blomberg N, Boiten JW, da Silva Santos LB, Bourne PE, et al.
2016 The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data management
and stewardship. Scientific Data 3 160018. (https://doi.org/10.1038/
sdata.2016.18)

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

Journal of Molecular
Endocrinology

B B Misra et al.

Williams EG, Wu Y, Jha P, Dubuis S, Blattmann P, Argmann CA,
Houten SM, Amariuta T, Wolski W, Zamboni N, et al. 2016 Systems
proteomics of liver mitochondria function. Science 352 6291.
(https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad0189)
Wilson J, Turna NS, Banks R, Pappin DJ & Zougman A 2017 Clinical
applications of universal S-Trap sample processing. Molecular and
Cellular Proteomics 16 S56–S56.
Wiśniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N & Mann M 2009 Universal
sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nature Methods 6
359. (https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1322)
Xu D, Keller JM, Popescu M & Bondugula R 2008 Applications of Fuzzy
Logic in Bioinformatics, vol. 9. World Scientific.
Yang JY, Karr JR, Watrous JD & Dorrestein PC 2011 Integrating ‘-omics’
and natural product discovery platforms to investigate metabolic
exchange in microbiomes. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 15
79–87. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2010.10.025)
Yoo S, Huang T, Campbell JD, Lee E, Tu Z, Geraci MW, Powell CA,
Schadt EE, Spira A & Zhu J 2014 MODMatcher: multi-omics data
matcher for integrative genomic analysis. PLoS Computational Biology
10 e1003790. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003790)
Yuan Y, Savage RS & Markowetz F 2011 Patient-specific data fusion
defines prognostic cancer subtypes. PLoS Computational Biology 7
1002227. (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002227)

Approaches and tools in
integrated omics

62 :1

R45

Yugi K, Kubota H, Hatano A & Kuroda S 2016 Trans-Omics: how to
reconstruct biochemical networks across multiple ‘omic’ layers.
Trends in Biotechnology 34 276–290. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tibtech.2015.12.013)
Yuryev A, Kotelnikova E & Daraselia N 2009 Ariadne’s ChemEffect and
Pathway Studio knowledge base. Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery 4
1307–1318. (https://doi.org/10.1517/17460440903413488)
Zahn H, Steif A, Laks E, Eirew P, VanInsberghe M, Shah SP, Aparicio S &
Hansen CL 2017 Scalable whole-genome single-cell library
preparation without preamplification. Nature Methods 14 167.
(https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.4140)
Zhang F, Xiao X, Hao J, Wang S, Wen Y & Guo X 2015 CPAS: a transomics pathway analysis tool for jointly analyzing DNA copy number
variations and mRNA expression profiles data. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics 53 363–366. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2014.12.012)
Zierer J, Pallister T, Tsai PC, Krumsiek J, Bell JT, Lauc G, Spector TD,
Menni C & Kastenmüller G 2016 Exploring the molecular basis
of age-related disease comorbidities using a multi-omics graphical
model. Scientific Reports 6 37646. (https://doi.org/10.1038/
srep37646)
Zou H & Hastie T 2005 Regularization and variable selection via the
elastic net. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical
Methodology) 67 301–320. (http://www.jstor.org/stable/3647580)

Received in final form 2 July 2018
Accepted 12 July 2018
Accepted Preprint published online 12 July 2018

https://jme.bioscientifica.com
https://doi.org/10.1530/JME-18-0055

© 2019 Society for Endocrinology
Published by Bioscientifica Ltd.
Printed in Great Britain

Downloaded from Bioscientifica.com at 02/26/2020 10:14:23PM
via free access

