Clinical Chemistry 49:7
1041–1044 (2003)

Minireview

Thomas M. Annesley

Background: Mass spectrometry (MS) is being introduced into a large number of clinical laboratories. It
provides specificity because of its ability to monitor
selected mass ions, sensitivity because of the enhanced
signal-to-noise ratio, and speed because it can help
avoid the need for intensive sample cleanup and long
analysis times. However, MS is not without problems
related to interference, especially through ion suppression effects. Ion suppression results from the presence
of less volatile compounds that can change the efficiency of droplet formation or droplet evaporation,
which in turn affects the amount of charged ion in the
gas phase that ultimately reaches the detector.
Content: This review discusses materials shown to
cause ion suppression, including salts, ion-pairing
agents, endogenous compounds, drugs, metabolites,
and proteins. Experimental protocols for examining ion
suppression, which should include, at a minimum,
signal recovery studies using specimen extracts with
added analyte, are also discussed, and a more comprehensive approach is presented that uses postcolumn
infusion of the analyte to evaluate protracted ionization
effects. Finally, this review presents options for minimizing or correcting ion suppression, which include
enhanced specimen cleanup, chromatographic changes,
reagent modifications, and effective internal standardization.
Summary: Whenever mass spectrometric assays are
developed, ion suppression studies should be performed using expected physiologic concentrations of
the analyte under investigation.
© 2003 American Association for Clinical Chemistry

Mass spectrometry (MS)1 is a powerful qualitative and
quantitative analytical technique that has been introduced
into many clinical and research laboratories during the
last 5 years. The cost of MS analyzers has dropped to a

Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0054.
Address for correspondence: University Hospital, Room 2G332, 1500 East
Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0054.
Received February 13, 2003; accepted April 17, 2003.

range that is affordable for a majority of laboratories.
Compared with a decade ago, instruments are more
robust, computer-interfaced, user-friendly, and easier to
maintain. There is a greater awareness by manufacturers
of the laboratory applications of MS in the clinical laboratory, so that technical support and assay development
are high priorities with these companies. In the clinical
laboratory, mass spectrometers are used to measure a
wide range of clinically relevant analytes. When applied
to biological samples, the power of MS lies in its selectivity toward the identification and quantification of compounds. The combination of gas chromatography or
HPLC with MS yields a particularly powerful tool. This is
especially so for HPLC-MS or HPLC-tandem MS, which is
the reason that this combination is being used by many
clinical laboratories.
For many years HPLC separations have been monitored through ultraviolet (UV), fluorescence, or electrochemical detection. In reversed-phase HPLC-UV chromatography, more polar compounds are poorly retained on
the column and elute at or near the initial void. This is
observed as a peak (or peaks) that will interfere with the
detection and quantification of the compound of interest.
For this reason, sample cleanup is required, and it is the
reason that chromatographic runs may be 10 min long. A
trade-off often exists, where more extensive sample
cleanup may allow shorter chromatographic runs. In
contrast, a mass detector can be configured to isolate and
quantify specific ions; therefore, sample cleanup and
chromatographic separation can theoretically be reduced
compared with other, less selective detection modes.
Interferences that are apparent with UV detection are not
observed with MS when analyte specific masses or product ions are monitored.
Because of the specificity achieved with MS detectors,
misconceptions have evolved that (a) chromatographic
separation can be minimized or even eliminated, (b) the
analytical column is needed only as a mechanism to load

1
Nonstandard abbreviations: MS, mass spectrometry; UV, ultraviolet; ESI,
electrospray ionization; TFA, trifluoroacetic acid; MALDI, matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization; and SELDI, surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization.

1041

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/clinchem/article-abstract/49/7/1041/5642000 by Concordia University user on 27 February 2020

Ion Suppression in Mass Spectrometry

1042

Annesley: Ion Suppression in MS

Fig. 1. Signal response comparisons (m/z 195) for caffeine added to
serum extracts prepared by solid-phase extraction, solvent extraction,
and protein precipitation.
Using an HPLC pump at a flow of 0.1 mL/min, I injected 5-␮L volumes into PEEK
tubing connected directly to the mass analyzer. (A, C, and E), 1 mg/L caffeine
solution. (B), solid-phase extract with 1 mg/L caffeine added. (D), methylene
chloride extract with 1 mg/L caffeine added. (F), serum protein precipitation
extract with 1 mg/L caffeine added. Conditions: mobile phase, 500 mL/L
methanol and 10 mL/L formic acid in water; instrument, Waters Micromass LCT;
capillary, 3600 V; sample cone, 40 V; RF lens, 180 V; extraction cone, 2 V;
desolvation temperature, 200 °C; source temperature, 100 °C; scan duration,
1.0 s; ionization mode, ES⫹.

nitrile. The three dried extracts were reconstituted with
0.5 mL of a caffeine solution (1 mg/L in 100 mL/L
methanol plus 10 mL/L formic acid), vortex-mixed, and
analyzed by injection (no analytical column) into the mass
analyzer. As can be clearly seen in Fig. 1, all three extracts
contained endogenous components that produced ion
suppression ⬎90% when compared with a caffeine reference solution of identical concentration.
The second protocol, which can be viewed as part of
interference checks for an assay, involves injection of
drugs or metabolites that may also be present in the
specimen. Just because a coeluting drug does not produce
similar mass fragments does not mean that this compound is incapable of ion suppression.
The third protocol involves postcolumn continuous
infusion of compound into the MS detector (3, 5, 6 ). The
instrumental setup includes a syringe pump connected
via a “tee” to the column effluent (Fig. 2). Because the
compound being tested is introduced into the mass detector at a constant rate, a constant ESI response should
ideally be observed (Fig. 3A) if no ionization interferences
occur when an extract from a biological specimen, such as
serum, is injected into the HPLC portion of the instrument. In actuality it is common to see suppression of the
signal at the time point that corresponds to the void
volume of the column. The degree of ion suppression and
the recovery time to full response can vary from compound to compound (3 ) and from sample to sample, and
can also be dependent on the sample preparation method

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/clinchem/article-abstract/49/7/1041/5642000 by Concordia University user on 27 February 2020

sample on the system, (c) specimen cleanup can be
minimized or eliminated, and (d) the use of HPLC-MS or
HPLC-tandem MS provides absolute accuracy and specificity. However, mass detection is not completely without
problems that can compromise or invalidate results.
One important factor that can affect the quantitative
performance of a mass detector is ion suppression. Sample matrix, coeluting compounds, and cross-talk can contribute to this effect. Although ion suppression can have
potential deleterious effects on both electrospray ionization (ESI) and atmospheric pressure chemical ionization
(APCI), evidence indicates that the electrospray interface
is more likely to be impacted (1 ). Ionization effects can
theoretically occur in either the solution phase or the gas
phase. Recent experiments involving ESI of biological
extracts have shown that the main cause of ion suppression is a change in the spray droplet solution properties
caused by the presence of nonvolatile or less volatile
solutes (1 ). These nonvolatile materials (e.g., salts, ionpairing agents, endogenous compounds, drugs/metabolites) change the efficiency of droplet formation or droplet
evaporation, which in turn affects the amount of charged
ion in the gas phase that ultimately reaches the detector.
The mass and charge of individual analytes are also
factors in making a compound a candidate for ion suppression or in making one compound a source of ion
suppression for another. It has been shown that molecules
with higher mass will suppress the signal of smaller
molecules (2 ) and that more polar analytes are more
susceptible to suppression (3 ).
The presence of ion suppression or other deleterious
effects can be evaluated via several experimental protocols. The first involves comparison of (a) the instrument
response for calibrators (including any internal standards)
injected directly in mobile phase, (b) the same amount of
compound added to preextracted samples, and (c) the
same amount of compound added to specimen matrix
before extraction (4 ). The data for the calibrator in mobile
phase provide a relative 100% response value. The data
for the same amount of compound added to preextracted
samples show the effect of sample matrix on MS response
(ion suppression), whereas the response data for extracted
samples containing the analyte can highlight whether any
loss of signal is attributable to the extraction process or
ion suppression. It is important to perform the latter two
experiments for several specimens to verify that subtle
matrix differences do not contribute to a change in MS
response. It is also important to evaluate ion suppression
that may result from other specimen types (e.g., EDTA or
heparin, uremia, lipemia). Fig. 1 shows an actual example
of ion suppression attributable to endogenous matrix
components. In this experiment, 0.1-mL aliquots of a
deidentified donor serum were subjected to three different extraction techniques: solid-phase extraction using a
Varian 60-mg Abselut column (water wash, methanol
elution), solvent extraction with 0.8 mL of methylene
chloride, and protein precipitation with 0.5 mL of aceto-

Clinical Chemistry 49, No. 7, 2003

Mobile phase or specimen extracts are injected into the HPLC system. The
analyte being evaluated is continuously infused postcolumn and is mixed with
the column effluent through a tee before entering the electrospray (ES) interface.

(Fig. 3, B and C). Because endogenous compounds from
the specimen matrix can continue to elute at any time
during the chromatographic run, ion suppression is not
limited to the column void. Ion suppression may not be
evident during the initial HPLC-MS analysis but may be
present during subsequent injections (Fig. 3C).
The observed degree of ion suppression can also be
dependent on the concentration of the analyte being
monitored, which relates to the matrix/analyte ratio. For
example, when analyzing clenbuterol in urine, van Hout
et al. (7 ) reported that the percentage of ion suppression
for different concentrations of drug using a C18 extraction
cartridge ranged from 37% at 93 ␮g/L to 69% at 45 ␮g/L.
Two important points can be taken from these types of
data: (a) they highlight the benefits of decreasing the
matrix/analyte ratio through more extensive sample
cleanup or through better chromatographic separation;
and (b) they show the importance of performing ion
suppression validations, such as those outlined in the

Fig. 3. Infusion chromatograms for hypothetical analyte.
(A), mobile phase injection; (B), serum liquid-liquid extract injection; (C), serum
protein precipitation extract injection. These profiles illustrate that ion suppression can be ⬎90%, that a recovery time may exist, and that suppression is not
limited to the solvent-front region. For a comprehensive presentation of these
types of effects, see Refs. (3, 5, 6 ).

three protocols above, using concentrations of analyte that
reflect those that will be encountered under real conditions.
In addition to the effects of sample matrix components,
there are other potential sources of ion suppression to be
considered. One is the effect that chromatographic ionpairing agents may have on signal intensity. For example,
trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) has been used in HPLC-UV
analyses because it improves peak shape and retention
times. Unfortunately, for MS analyses TFA also causes
signal suppression and must be dealt with if this acid is
used in the mobile phase. Being a component of the
mobile phase, this agent will continuously be introduced
into the ESI interface, so that signal suppression may be
observed throughout the entire chromatographic run.
Fortunately there are several options that can be used
to minimize or correct for ion suppression during
HPLC-MS analyses. For ion-pairing, other, weaker acids
such as acetic, formic, or hexafluorobutyric acid may be
successfully substituted for TFA in HPLC-MS analyses. If
TFA must be used as an ion-pairing agent to achieve
acceptable chromatography and peak shape, it may be
possible to decrease the TFA concentration and still obtain
adequate separation. The use of surface tension-lowering
modifiers in the ESI source has also been reported to be
successful when TFA is used as a mobile phase modifier
(8 ). The postcolumn addition of acids and solvent carriers
to displace TFA from compounds and aid ionization has
also been used successfully. This is a process termed the
“TFA Fix” (9 ). Yamaguchi et al. (10 ) reported the use of
2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethanol as a signal enhancer to eliminate the ion-suppressive effects of acetate anions; this
agent produced an ⬃100-fold enhancement of the signal
for the model drug ibuprofen.
Another way to counter ion suppression is to modify
the chromatographic conditions so that the compound(s)
of interest elute(s) in a region where ion suppression is
not observed. This generally involves increasing the chromatography time, but not always so (11 ). Because the
majority of HPLC assays include an internal standard
(stable isotope or structural analog), another approach is
to modify the chromatography so that the compound of
interest and the internal standard coelute (12 ). The ion
suppression for both compounds should become equal if
the peaks chromatographically coincide, thus “correcting” for the degree of suppression. If a stable-isotope
internal standard is available, the ion suppression would
be identical for the analyte and internal standard. It
should be mentioned, however, that the use of an internal
standard (even a stable isotope) might not fully solve
accuracy or precision problems with the assay if ion
suppression exists, as demonstrated in Figs. 1 and 3.
Recall that part of the value of MS lies in the high
signal-to-noise ratio achievable with this technique. If ion
suppression significantly reduces the signal of the analyte
or internal standard, the signal-to-noise may be compromised to a point where accuracy or precision becomes

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/clinchem/article-abstract/49/7/1041/5642000 by Concordia University user on 27 February 2020

Fig. 2. Postcolumn infusion system.

1043

1044

Annesley: Ion Suppression in MS

References
1. King R, Bonfiglio R, Fernandez-Metzler C, Miller-Stein C, Olah T.
Mechanistic investigation of ionization suppression in electrospray ionization. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2000;11:942–50.
2. Sterner JL, Johnston MV, Nicol GR Ridge DP. Signal suppression in
electrospray ionization fourier transform mass spectrometry of
multi-component samples. J Mass Spectrom 2000;35:385–91.
3. Bonfiglio R, King RC, Olah TV, Merkle K. The effects of sample
preparation methods on the variability of the electrospray ionization response for model drug compounds. Rapid Commun Mass
Spectrom 1999;13:1175– 85.
4. Matuszewski BK, Constanzer ML, Chavez-Eng CM. Matrix effect in
quantitative LC/MS/MS analyses of biological fluids: a method for
determination of finasteride in human plasma at picogram per
milliliter concentrations. Anal Chem 1998;70:882–9.
5. Muller C, Schafer P, Stortzel M, Vogt S, Weinmann W. Ion
suppression effects in liquid chromatography-electrospray-ionisation transport-region collision induced dissociation mass spectrometry with different serum extraction methods for systematic

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

toxicological analysis with mass spectral libraries. J Chromatogr B
2002;773:47–52.
Hsieh Y, Chintala M, Mei H, Agans J, Brisson J-M, Ng K, et al.
Quantitative screening and matrix effect studies of drug discovery
compounds in monkey plasma using fast-gradient liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 2001;15:2481–7.
van Hout MWJ, Hoffland CM, Niederlander HAG, de Jong GJ.
On-line coupling of solid-phase extraction with mass spectrometry
for the analysis of biological samples. II. Determination of clenbuterol in urine using multiple-stage mass spectrometry in an
ion-trap spectrometer. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 2000;14:
2103–11.
Eshraghi J, Chowdhury SK. Factors affecting the electrospray
ionization of effluents containing trifluoroacetic acid for highperformance liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Anal
Chem 1993;65:3528 –33.
Apffel A, Fischer S, Goldberg G, Goodley PC, Kuhlmann FE.
Enhanced sensitivity for peptide mapping with electrospray liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry in the presence of signal
suppression due to trifluoroacetic acid-containing mobile phases.
J Chromatogr A 1995;712:177–90.
Yamaguchi J, Ohmichi M, Jingu S, Ogawa N, Higuchi S. Utility of
postcolumn addition of 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethanol, a signal-enhancing modifier, for metabolite screening with liquid chromatography and negative ion electrospray ionization mass spectrometry.
Anal Chem 1999;71:5386 –90.
Beato BD, Gray DD, Wong P, Hampsch J, Peters S. Ramifications
of pump-switching step gradients for bioanalytical LC/MS/MS
assays. Curr Sep 2000;19:55– 8.
Kitamura R, Matsuoka K, Matsushima E, Kawaguchi Y. Improvement in precision of the liquid chromatographic-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometric analysis of 3⬘-C-ethynylcytidine in rat plasma. J Chromatogr B 2001;754:113–9.
Krause E, Wenschuh H, Jungblut PR. The dominance of argininecontaining peptides in MALDI-derived tryptic mass fingerprints of
proteins. Anal Chem 1999;71:4160 –5.
Gharahdaghi F, Kirchner M, Fernandez J, Mische SM. Peptidemass profiles of polyvinylidene difluoride-bound proteins by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry in the presence of nonionic detergents. Anal Biochem
1996;233:94 –9.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/clinchem/article-abstract/49/7/1041/5642000 by Concordia University user on 27 February 2020

negatively affected. It is for this reason that ion suppression should be evaluated even if an internal standard is
included in the assay.
Lastly, because other MS techniques such as Fourier
transform (FTMS), matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI), and surface-enhanced laser desorption/
ionization (SELDI) are being more widely used, it is worth
mentioning that ion suppression is not limited to just
HPLC-MS or ESI interfaces, although the discussion in
this review has focused on ESI. Arginine-containing peptides have been reported to dominate the peptide pattern
for protein digests (13 ), the extent of which depends on
the matrix used. The presence of ionic detergents such as
Triton X-100 and Tween 20 has also been shown to cause
signal suppression in MALDI experiments, which can be
countered by modifications to the matrix (14 ). Because
SELDI also uses the same matrices and ionization process,
this technique would be similarly affected.

