Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering
VOL. 115 No. 6, 579e589, 2013
www.elsevier.com/locate/jbiosc

REVIEW

Current metabolomics: Practical applications
Sastia P. Putri,1 Yasumune Nakayama,1 Fumio Matsuda,2 Takato Uchikata,1 Shizu Kobayashi,1
Atsuki Matsubara,1 and Eiichiro Fukusaki1, *
Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan1 and Department of Bioinformatic
Engineering, Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan2
Received 10 June 2012; accepted 5 December 2012
Available online 29 January 2013

The ﬁeld of metabolomics continues to grow rapidly over the last decade and has been proven to be a powerful
technology in predicting and explaining complex phenotypes in diverse biological systems. Metabolomics complements
other omics, such as transcriptomics and proteomics and since it is a ‘downstream’ result of gene expression, changes in
the metabolome is considered to best reﬂect the activities of the cell at a functional level. Thus far, metabolomics might
be the sole technology capable of detecting complex, biologically essential changes. As one of the omics technology,
metabolomics has exciting applications in varied ﬁelds, including medical science, synthetic biology, medicine, and
predictive modeling of plant, animal and microbial systems. In addition, integrated applications with genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics provide greater understanding of global system biology. In this review, we discuss recent
applications of metabolomics in microbiology, plant, animal, food, and medical science.
Ó 2013, The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. All rights reserved.
[Key words: Metabolomics; Metabolome; Mass spectrometry; Chemometrics; Multivariate analysis]

The rapidly growing ﬁeld of metabolomics complements data
derived from genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics in
providing a systematic approach to the study of biological
systems and networks (1). Metabolomics has been an applicationdriven science with broad range of applications in various ﬁelds,
including medical science, synthetic biology, medicine, and
predictive modeling of plant, animal and microbial systems. The
high applicability of metabolomics to various ﬁelds partly stems
from the close association of the metabolome to the physiology of
the cell. While the genome, transcriptome and proteome can be
seen as mediums in the ﬂow of gene expression, the metabolome
represents the ﬁnal omic level in a biological system, and reﬂects
changes in phenotype and function (2). The metabolomics
workﬂow includes sample preparation, analysis using various
instruments, data processing and data analysis. The power of
metabolomics lies on the acquisition of analytical data in which
metabolites in a cellular system are quantiﬁed, and the extraction
of the most meaningful elements of the data by using various
data analysis tool. In this article, we discuss the application of
metabolomics in various ﬁelds, namely in microbiology, and
plant, animal, medical and food sciences.
MICROBIAL METABOLOMICS
Microbe is an important sample for the ﬁeld of metabolomics
since it has been used for development of experimental procedures
* Corresponding author. Tel./fax: þ81 6 6879 7424.
E-mail address: fukusaki@bio.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp (E. Fukusaki).

and construction of research tactics. Because metabolomics is
a high-resolution analysis, it requires controllable experimental
conditions, such as growth conditions and surrounding environment to validate methods. Therefore, checking method validation is
one important application of microbial metabolomics, especially
sample preparation and metabolite measurement.
Several studies have been conducted to optimize sample preparation using microorganisms for metabolomics (3e7). There are
two important processes in sample preparation: quenching and
extraction. Quenching is the process of stopping biological reactions in a cell, and extraction is the process of obtaining metabolites
from the cell. In the early stages of its development, metabolomics
was used for the discrimination of strains possessing different
characteristics. Owing to its multicomponent data, high-resolution
information for each cell type could be successfully obtained (8). In
such study, high reproducibility is an important consideration for
sample preparation. However, recent applications have been
gradually focusing on metabolism per se. Thus, sample preparation,
especially sample quenching, has been focused on stopping
metabolism at a speciﬁc period to measure the true quantity of
metabolites at a given time. For quenching, the following are
required to accurately measure the quantity of metabolite in a cell:
short time frame during which the biological reaction is stopped,
limited leakage of metabolite and reproducibility. A summary of
quenching procedures can be seen in Table 1 (9e15).
The appropriate extraction method must be chosen considering
the following: cell properties, such as robustness of the cell
membrane, chemical properties of the target analyte and reactivity
of enzymes. The most common method is organic solvent

1389-1723/$ e see front matter Ó 2013, The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.12.007

580

PUTRI ET AL.

J. BIOSCI. BIOENG.,
TABLE 1. Summary of common quenching methods in microbial metabolomics.

Method
Filtration
quenching

Injection
quenching

Features

Advantage

Disadvantage

Application

Sample is collected with a
ﬁlter membrane and
quenched by rapid cooling
or chemicals
Sample is directly injected to
a pre-cooled quenching
solution and collected by
centrifugation

Good
reproducibility

Time-consuming, requires manual operation

Recommended for
prokaryotes,
i.e., E. coli

9e11

Rapid

Metabolite leakage (particularly in
gram-negative bacteria) and leftover
sample (can be overcome by additional
washing step but may result in signiﬁcant
metabolite leakage)

Commonly used
in S. cerevisiae

3,4,12e14

extraction, using methanol and chloroform but physical stresses,
such as high temperature or freeze-thaw, are sometimes applied. In
an early study of metabolite extraction from Escherichia coli for
global analysis, cold (40 C) methanol extraction produced good
results compared with hot ethanol, hot methanol, perchloric acid,
alkaline or methanol/chloroform extraction in terms of metabolite
coverage, reproducibility and simplicity (15). A version of this
protocol, using 100% cold methanol at 48 C with multiple
freezeethaw cycles, has also been developed (4). Although the
authors concluded that this method has global applicability, they
noted that some other extraction methods were also suitable for
some target analyses. For Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the boiling
ethanol and chloroform-methanol extraction methods exhibited
the best efﬁcacy and highest metabolite recovery, compared with
hot water, freezing-thawing in methanol and acidic acetonitrilemethanol extraction (16).
One of the groundbreaking works in early microbial metabolomics was the phenotyping of silent gene mutants (8). In this
work, silent gene knockout mutants were distinguished by metabolic snapshots and multivariate analysis. This suggested a possible
beneﬁt of metabolomics phenotyping with high resolution for gene
functioning. The recent advancement in metabolic phenotyping has
succeeded in the semi-rational screening of aging-related genes
(17). For phenotyping, relative quantiﬁcation is usually sufﬁcient,
while absolute quantiﬁcation can be used to study metabolic
dynamics, e.g., using the Km of enzymes, within a particular
pathway.
Although absolute quantiﬁcation is difﬁcult to achieve by MSbased metabolomics, it has been made possible by the combination
of isotopically full labeled cells and commercially available
compounds (18). Stable isotopes are also used in the study of
microbial metabolomics. Recently, an interesting study, using 13C,
discovered riboneogenesis in S. cerevisiae by target proﬁling of
isotopomers in knockout mutants (19). Furthermore, metabolomics-based molecular network analysis has been performed
using systematic in vivo metaboliteeprotein interactions in the
ergosterol biosynthesis pathway (20). Footprinting, which is analysis of culture medium, is also used to distinguish genotype (21).
And recent study showed the potential of footprinting for study of
co-culture system (22).
The most studied bacterial species in metabolomics is E. coli. In
early studies, thin-layer chromatography and 14C-glucose were
used to reveal the relationship between cellular metabolism and
global regulation (23). This report demonstrated that multiple
metabolites, such as glutamate, aspartate, trehalose, adenosine,
UDP-sugar and putrescine level varied with different speciﬁc
growth rate under chemostat condition. More recently, metabolic
dynamics was studied by using absolute quantiﬁcation and Km of
related enzymes to clarify that the pair of most detected metabolite
intercellular concentration exceeded the Km value of its related
enzyme (18). In addition, the relationship between ammonia
assimilation and nutrient perturbation was studied by combination
of absolute quantiﬁcation and ﬂux simulation (24). This study reported two important intermediates, 2-oxoglutarate and

Reference

glutamine, for ammonia assimilation and more interestingly the
authors showed that despite having weak enzymatic inhibition,
some active-site inhibitors play important role in metabolic
dynamics (24). Rapid analysis using MALDI has been used to obtain
detailed time course data to study the dynamics of intracellular
metabolism (25). An approach using 13C-labeled intermediates in
central metabolism for metabolic ﬂux analysis has also been
developed for non-stationary metabolic ﬂux analysis (26).
Some innovative methodological studies in eukaryotes have
already been described above (17,19e21). In S. cerevisiae, the relationship between concentration of metabolites and enzyme abundance was studied to reveal the link between metabolic ﬂux and
global metabolism (27). In metabolic engineering, several studies
have been conducted to improve yields of important metabolites,
such as high production of SO2 in the bottom-fermenting yeast
Saccharomyces pastorianus (28), through a combination of metabolomics and transcriptomics. In addition, the development of
metabolic engineering strategies to confer resistance to stresses has
been studied using xylose-fermenting S. cerevisiae to ﬁnd target
genes for optimization of fermentation (29). The discovery of a new
synthetic pathway for glyoxylate from glycine was achieved using
metabolomics and isotope labeling analysis (30).
Co-culture system also has been studied (22,31). Zhou et al.
studied the cooperation between Bacillus megaterium and Ketogulonicigenium vulgare, which is used for production of precursor of
vitamin C, by time course sampling and discovered symbiotic
relation at early growth stage and antagonism at later stage (31).
Nakanishi et al. (22) studied more dynamic state of metabolism
under co-culture system using 13C-substrate and nuclear magnetic
resonance, and cooperation between Biﬁdobacterium longum and
E. coli O157. The author demonstrated that aspartate and serine
from B. longum is utilized by E. coli.
Metabolomics for the study of biological systems still has a long
period of development ahead before reaching maturity. In the
future, metabolome analysis of microorganisms will remain
invaluable for the development of methods for the study of higher
organisms.
PLANT METABOLOMICS
The application of metabolomics techniques to plant science
was pioneered by groups at the Max Planck Institute. Weckwerth
and coworkers obtained a series of metabolome data from potato
tubers using GC/MS (32). A pair-wise comparison of metabolite
levels showed that many pairs of metabolites exist, and that their
levels show high correlation coefﬁcients despite ﬂuctuations in
biological replicates. The investigators also demonstrated that the
structure of the correlation network could be changed in a mutant
with a silent phenotype, in which metabolic changes were
observed despite a lack of visible changes. Theoretical studies
revealed that factors such as equilibrium between neighboring
metabolites shared biosynthetic enzymes and coordinated regulation of gene expression are likely responsible for the correlation
between metabolite levels (33). These pioneering works

VOL. 115, 2013
demonstrated that a novel relationship among metabolites can be
determined using statistical analysis of a metabolome dataset, from
which information on the plant metabolic system can be obtained.
These investigations also indicate that the metabolome represents
the ultimate phenotype of cells. Due to the technical advantages,
metabolomics has played a key role in plant science, helping
researchers to understand cellular systems and decode the function
of genes (34).
It is known that the metabolic state of plants is dynamically
controlled by transcriptional regulation in response to environmental and developmental conditions. The regulatory mechanisms
between gene expression and the resulting metabolic phenotype is,
however, still a black box. Thus, detailed investigation of the
dynamic behavior of metabolic systems has been a big challenge for
plant systems biologists. One promising strategy is a global survey
of gene expression and metabolite accumulation to estimate
mechanisms. In order to address this issue, an integrated analysis of
transcriptome and metabolome data combined with metabolic
pathway information was performed. The early applications of this
strategy included an investigation of the reprogramming of gene
expression and metabolism triggered by nutritional stress, such as
sulfur starvation. A major breakthrough provided by this strategy
was the identiﬁcation of a gene-to-metabolite network regulating
plant metabolism against environmental stress. Integrated analysis
of time course data revealed that groups of metabolites and genes
related to primary and secondary metabolites are coordinately
modulated by stress induced by sulfur deﬁciency (35,36). A similar
analysis was performed for various plants, including pathogeninfected Medicago and metabolically engineered rice (37,38).
Another major achievement was the prediction of novel gene
function by using the rules governing the link between gene
expression and metabolite accumulation. The integrated analysis
allowed the prediction of genes involved in glucosinolate biosynthesis [e.g., genes coding for two MYB transcription factors (39) and
side chain elongation (40)] in a comprehensive manner. This
strategy has also been applied to other plant species (41,42).
The integrated analysis of gene expression and secondary
metabolites in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana was intensively
performed for construction of the AtMetExpress development
dataset, which is part of the AtMetExpress metabolite accumulation
atlas (43). Genome sequence analysis of A. thaliana revealed that it
has many metabolic genes, possibly for the production of many
phytochemicals. However, phytochemical diversity in plant species,
and the underlying metabolic systems are unclear. Thus, the
phytochemicals produced during development in A. thaliana were
investigated in samples covering many growth stages and organs.
Based on the dataset, 1589 metabolite signals were detected, from
which the structures of 167 metabolites were elucidated. Analysis of
the dataset demonstrated that Arabidopsis produces various
phytochemicals in a highly tissue-speciﬁc manner. Integrated
analyses with transcriptome data revealed that tissue-speciﬁc
accumulation often accompanies the expression of key biosynthesis-related genes (44). These results indicate that the functional
differentiation of secondary metabolite biosynthesis among the
various tissues was achieved by controlling the expression of a small
number of key regulatory genes. It is also postulated that a simple
mode of regulation, transcript-to-metabolite, is the origin of the
dynamics and diversity of plant secondary metabolism.
Metabolomics techniques have also been applied to the crop and
breeding sciences. Genetic factors regulating metabolite levels have
been intensively investigated because nutritional quality is an
important quantitative trait of crops. For example, quantitative trait
locus (QTL) analysis of m-traits revealed the loci responsible for the
control of vitamin E levels (45). Recently, metabolome QTL analyses
have been conducted for a comprehensive understanding of the
genetic background controlling the plant metabolome (46e51).

APPLICATION OF METABOLOMICS

581

QTL analysis of tomato fruit traits indicated that levels of primary
metabolites, including amino acids and sugars, were under the
control of many QTLs (52), and also showed that the modes of
inheritance differ for the various metabolites (53). The analysis of
Arabidopsis revealed that QTLs are unevenly distributed in the
genome, suggesting that the overall composition of the plant
metabolome can be controlled by small genomic regions (48). In
addition, the relationship between metabolite composition and
other important traits, such as yield and biomass, has been investigated since these traits are likely to interact closely with metabolism in plants. The analysis of tomato fruit traits with metabolome
data indicated that there are certain correlations among these
traits, although in most cases, only weak correlations were
observed (46). Regression analysis of metabolome data for Arabidopsis biomass traits demonstrated that the growth rate of Arabidopsis seedlings is predictable from the metabolome signature to
a degree (48). These studies suggest that the interactions between
metabolites and other traits should be predictable using metabolome data.
Molecular breeding by the introduction of various transgenes
into plants is an efﬁcient way to produce genetically modiﬁed (GM)
crops with improved performance. Metabolomics plays a key role
in the public acceptance of GM crops by providing data necessary
for risk management (52). Similarities between the metabolic
proﬁles of tissues from GM plants, non-transformants and other
cultivars have been examined using multivariate analysis (53,54).
Substantial equivalence is veriﬁed when the perturbation of the
metabolic proﬁle caused by transgene expression is within the
variance that exists among the various cultivars.
Technical improvements in metabolomics have been spurred by
the need of plant scientists to detect and identify diverse phytochemicals. The ability to produce various phytochemicals has
evolved in plants for the purpose of self-defense, environmental
adaptation and interaction with other organisms. Because humans
utilize phytochemicals for numerous purposes, including the
production of pharmaceuticals, further understanding of the
genetic background behind the diversity of secondary metabolites
produced by plants will facilitate a more intensive application of
these compounds. However, the current bottleneck in metabolome
analysis of plant metabolites is the annotation of metabolite signals
(55e57). It has recently been recognized that three types of data
and infrastructure are required for database-assisted elucidation of
metabolite structures (58,59). First, tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra
data for structural elucidation of metabolites (60). Second, a
comprehensive mass spectral database of phytochemicals. Although
great effort has been put into construction of the MS/MS spectral
databases (61), further enrichment is required for structural elucidation of a wider range of metabolites. Third, a method to determine
the false discovery rate in large-scale search results (62). Further
development of these databases and methodology is required to
explore the diversity of plant secondary metabolites. This is the next
challenge in the development of metabolomics technology.
ANIMAL METABOLOMICS
Metabolomics technology has been applied to study biological
phenomena in several model organisms, including zebra ﬁsh and
fruit ﬂy. Comprehensive analysis of metabolites in these organisms
has provided a wealth of information on physiological, developmental and pathological processes. Metabolomics can therefore
provide novel insight that can be developed and applied to research
in other species. A summary of application of metabolomics in
animal science can be seen in Table 2.
Zebra ﬁsh (Danio rerio) The zebra ﬁsh (D. rerio) is a very
popular model organism for biological, behavioral and biomedical

582

PUTRI ET AL.

J. BIOSCI. BIOENG.,
TABLE 2. Summary of animal metabolomics applications cited in this review.

Species
Zebra ﬁsh
Zebra ﬁsh
Zebra ﬁsh
Nematode
Nematode
Fruit ﬂy
Fruit ﬂy
Fruit ﬂy
Fruit ﬂy
Fruit ﬂy

Material

Method

Approach

Application

Reference

Egg
Egg
Liver
Whole body
Whole body
Whole body
Whole body
Whole body
Thorax
Whole body

GC/MS
LC/MS
GC/MS, LC/MS/MS, NMR
LC/MS, NMR
LC/ﬂuorescence detection
NMR
NMR
NMR
NMR
LC/FT-MS

Non-targeted
Non-targeted
Targeted
Targeted/non-targeted
Targeted
Non-targeted
Non-targeted
Non-targeted
Non-targeted
Targeted

Prediction of vertebrate development
Prediction of vertebrate development
Metabolic proﬁling of male and female zebra ﬁsh liver
Metabolic responses to cadmium
Metabolic proﬁling of mitochondrial respiratory chain mutants
Metabolomic signatures of inbreeding
Metabolic proﬁling of heat stress
Metabolomic proﬁling of rapid cold hardening and cold shock
Metabolomic of age-related decline of hypoxia tolerance
Metabonomic proﬁling of different strains

66
67
68
75
77
85
86
87
88
89

research, particularly for studies on embryogenesis, organogenesis
and general vertebrate development. The zebra ﬁsh is now gaining
popularity as a model for research into disease and drug discovery.
This is because, compared with rodents, they are easily bred in large
numbers with a relatively low maintenance cost. In addition, the
small size of this ﬁsh makes it highly suitable for whole organism
assessment of changes in global gene expression caused by chemicals and drugs (63e65).
Hayashi et al. (66) successfully demonstrated the dynamic
changes involved in early vertebrate development by the metabolomics approach. They used a metabolomics as a novel strategy in
order to understand embryogenesis in zebra ﬁsh. The metabolome
during the different stages of embryogenesis exhibited dynamic
changes, indicating that the types and quantities of metabolites are
correlated with biological activities during development because
they could successfully predict embryonic stages using metabolomic information. On the basis of the robust correlation between
the metabolome and embryogenesis, they concluded that the
metabolome can be used as a ﬁngerprint for a particular developmental process.
Metabolomics has been used to study single zebra ﬁsh
embryos (67). Highly accurate PLS models of developmental
stages were constructed using single-embryo metabolic nontarget ﬁngerprinting. This model was implemented on different
developmental stages under standard rearing conditions, but it
was necessary to apply different rearing conditions to demonstrate the applicability and versatility of this single-embryo
metabolomics approach. This metabolomics approach should
enable the identiﬁcation of the developmental stage of embryos
exhibiting no visible defects and help clarify the metabolic
differences between wild-type and mutant animals or drug
treatments and so on.
Ong et al. (68) performed a multiple platform approach, incorporating GC/MS, LC/MS and 1H NMR to study the biochemical
proﬁles of livers from female and male zebra ﬁsh. Their ﬁndings
showed that 1H NMR provided comprehensive information on
glucose, amino acids, pyruvate and other biochemical constituents
of the zebra ﬁsh liver. GC/MS spectrometry was able to analyze
cholesterol, as well as saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. LC/MS
spectrometry was ideal for the analysis of lipids and phospholipids.
This multiple techniques approach showed signiﬁcant differences
in the liver of female and male zebra ﬁsh. The biomolecules
observed to be different included amino acid, unsaturated fatty
acids, cholesterol, phospholipids and other small molecules. The
overall ﬁndings suggest that the multiplatform approach offers
a much better coverage of the metabolome.
Nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans) The nematode (C. elegans) has been characterized in great detail in terms of its development, morphology and physiology at the cellular level, and its
genome has been completely sequenced (69). A powerful genetic
tool for C. elegans is available, as well as a large collection of
mutants. In addition, C. elegans is one of the few animals for

which high-throughput in vivo RNA interference (RNAi) screening
has been established (70). C. elegans is a good platform, for
example, to understand the physiology of lifespan and aging, for
the study of genetic diseases, drug toxicity screening and
pharmacological studies (71e74).
Hughes et al. (75) generated different mutants and performed
NMR- and UPLC-MS-based metabolomic analyses. Their results
imply that the main physiological responses to cadmium are
independent of metallothionein status (at least in phytochelatin
synthase-normal nematodes) and result in an increased production
of phytochelatins by altered ﬂux through the methionine transsulfonation pathway. They conﬁrmed earlier observations that
phytochelatin synthase is required in C. elegans for protection
against cadmium by demonstrating the production of phytochelatins (phytochelatin-2 and phytochelatin-3) directly in tissue
extracts of cadmium-exposed C. elegans.
C. elegans, which has greater than 83% genetic homology with
humans (76), affords a model of primary mitochondrial dysfunction
that provides insight into cellular adaptations that accompany
mutations in nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins. Falk
et al. (77) applied metabolomics to mutants of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain. Their work showed that primary mitochondrial
disease is associated with gene expression alterations in multiple
metabolic pathways. Speciﬁc pathways that were signiﬁcantly
upregulated in primary mitochondrial respiratory chain disease
included those involved in oxidative phosphorylation and the
tricarboxylic acid cycle, and those participating in carbohydrate,
amino acid and fatty acid metabolism.
A powerful genetic toolset for C. elegans exists and a large
collection of mutants is available. Therefore, C. elegans is an ideal
model organism to explore the correlation between metabolites
and gene function.
Fruit ﬂy (Drosophila melanogaster) The fruit ﬂy (D. melanogaster) is another principal model organism used for studying the
genetics of aging and physiology, for a number of reasons. Flies
develop to adulthood quickly, have a short lifespan, are easy to breed
and undergo functional senescence with similarities to human
aging (78). Transcriptional expression studies of D. melanogaster
that investigate the extent to which gene transcription varies
between phenotypes are increasingly common, including studies
of pesticide resistance (79), developmental biology (80), oxidative
stress (81,82), starvation, sugar feeding and the effects of
phenobarbital (83,84). Metabolomics approach of D. melanogaster
was performed in order to investigate the relationship between
metabolite and phenotype.
Pedersen et al. (85) applied metabolomics using a multiple
platform approach to study the effects of breeding of Drosophila,
including mutations and stressful temperatures. They found that
the metabolite ﬁngerprints of inbred and outbred ﬂies were clearly
distinguishable. The approach used in this study to examine the
association between metabolite and gene expression levels is likely
to be generally applicable for the integration of multivariate data

VOL. 115, 2013

APPLICATION OF METABOLOMICS

from different omic technologies. Integration of information across
multi-omic technologies has the potential to broaden the limited
window provided by individual technologies, thus enhancing the
understanding of biological systems.
Malmendal et al. (86) conﬁrmed that NMR metabolomic proﬁling
could be used to understand the perturbations (and the homeostatic
response) caused by heat stress in D. melanogaster. The metabolite
proﬁle was analyzed during recovery after exposure to different
thermal stress treatments and compared with untreated controls
with time course. They demonstrated that the analytical method
used to understand the metabolic trajectory caused by a biological
stress is a powerful tool for monitoring effects on homeostasis, which
could be widely applied to cellular/molecular physiology and
biochemistry. The data revealed changes in several speciﬁc metabolites that are likely to be related to stress, and both the overall
metabolomic response and changes in the speciﬁc metabolites varied
with the intensity of the heat stress applied to the ﬂies. In addition,
D. melanogaster has features that make it an ideal organism for the
development of metabolomics models for the study of physiology.
Indeed, metabolomics has been successfully applied for the study of
cold shock (87), hypoxia (88) and mutations (89) in this species.
Although the application of metabolomics for the study of
animal physiology and biochemistry is still relatively limited in
comparison with plant science and microbiology (less than 30
articles for each study organism, i.e., zebra ﬁsh, nematode and fruit
ﬂy as shown by the number of hit articles in PubMed, August 1,
2012), the number of reports is steadily increasing in recent years.
Metabolomics approach will enable identiﬁcation of mutants
exhibiting no visible defects and clariﬁcation of novel aspects of
known mutants. Integration of information across multi omics
technologies has the potential to broaden the limited window
provided by individual technologies, thus enhancing our understanding of biological systems. Accumulation of metabolome data
for various model organisms should further animal science.
MEDICAL METABOLOMICS
With the recent breakthrough in metabolomics technologies,
application of metabolomics has been increasing in the medical

583

ﬁeld. There are two major purposes for its use in medicine; the ﬁrst
is to acquire knowledge on the mechanisms of drug action or the
disease itself, and another is to explore biomarkers. Aside from
diagnostic purposes, biomarkers have been used as indicators of
toxicity and therapeutic effects. This chapter discusses the different
approaches used for various diseases (Table 3).
Metabolic syndromes and related diseases Life-threatening
diseases caused by disorders of lipid and sugar metabolism, such as
cerebrovascular and cardiovascular disease, are a major cause of
death in developed countries. Therefore, it is important to detect
changes in metabolites for the acquisition of pathophysiological
knowledge and discovery of biomarkers for early diagnosis of these
fatal diseases. Sabatine et al. examined changes in the metabolome
caused by exercise stress in inducible ischemia patients and
a control group to identify novel biomarkers of myocardial ischemia
(90). LC/MS-based metabolomic analysis revealed that 6 out of the
23 metabolites that varied after exercise in patients were involved
in the citric acid metabolic pathway. Furthermore, a signiﬁcant
difference in changes of six metabolites, including citric acid,
between patients and controls was observed. Teul and coworkers
used GC/MS in combination with 1H NMR and identiﬁed 24
metabolites involved in insulin-resistance that were important
for distinguishing patients with stable carotid atherosclerosis
from healthy subjects (91).
Recently, research has been conducted to clarify the detailed
pathogenic mechanisms of hyperlipidemia and diabetes, which
occur prior to these diseases. Connor et al. applied an integrated
metabolome/transcriptome analysis to model type 2 diabetes in db/
db mice (92). As a result, differences in 24 pathways related to lipid
metabolism, including gluconeogenesis, mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress and branched chain amino acid biosynthesis,
were observed between db/db and db/þ (control) mice. Metabolomic analysis was also applied to human subjects. Suhre et al.
applied multiplatform metabolomics using GC, LC, MS/MS and
NMR to subjects with self-reported diabetes and controls and
identiﬁed 420 metabolites from the sera of these subjects (93).
They found perturbations in pathways linked to kidney dysfunction, lipid metabolism and interactions with gut microﬂora. Two
independent studies of obesity using metabolomics were also

TABLE 3. Summary of medical metabolomics applications cited in this review.
Disease

Species

Material

Method

Speciﬁc biomarker species

Reference

Targeted
Targeted
Targeted

Gamma-amino-butyric acid, uric acid, citrate
Mannose, 1,5-anhydroglucitol, phenylacetylglutamine
3-Indoxyl sulfate, glycerophospholipids, bile acids

90,91
92
93

Lysophosphatidylcholine
Phosphatidylcholine
Trimethylamine N-oxide, choline, betaine
Alpha-glycerolphosphate, uracil, glycine
(13C-enrichment in lactate, alanine, succinate)

94
95
96
97
98

GC/MS
GC/MS

Non-targeted
Targeted
Non-targeted
Non-targeted
Stable isotope
resolved analysis
Targeted
Non-targeted

Thiodiglycolic acid, lactic acid, 7-hydroxyoctanoic acid
Xylitol, urea, hydroxy proline dipeptide

99
100

Urine/tissue
Saliva
Saliva
Saliva

GC/MS
CE/MS
CE/MS
CE/MS

Targeted
Non-targeted
Non-targeted
Non-targeted

101
102
102
102

NMR

Non-targeted

Human
Human/mouse
Human

Cerebrospinal
ﬂuid
Plasma
Serum
Plasma

Succinate, N-acetyl-aspartate, 2-hydroxyhippurate
Pyrroline, leucine þ isoleucine, taurine
Taurine, putrescine, leucine þ isoleucine
Leucine þ isoleucine, phenylalanine,
alpha-amino butyric acid
Lactate, citrate, glucose

NMR
GC/MS
LC/MS/MS, GC/MS

Targeted
Non-targeted
Targeted

104
105
106

Rat

Plasma

GC/MS

Targeted

Threonate, myoinositol, suberate
Glycerol, urea, valine
Free fatty acids, triglycerides,
phosphatidylethanolamine
Glucose, glutamine, butanedioic acid

Myocardial ischemia
Type 2 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes

Human
Mouse
Human

Plasma
Urine
Plasma

Obesity
Obesity
Cardiovascular disease
Ovarian carcinoma
Lung cancer

Human
Human
Human
Human
Human

Serum
Serum
Plasma
Tumor tissue
Tissue, plasma

LC/MS/MS
NMR
GC/MS, LC/MS/MS,
NMR
LC/MS/MS
MS/MS
LC/MS/MS
GC/MS
GC/MS, NMR

Pancreatic cancer
Hepatocellular
carcinoma
Colorectal cancer
Oral cancer
Breast cancer
Pancreatic cancer

Human
Human

Serum
Urine

Human/rat
Human
Human
Human

Schizophrenia

Human

Parkinson’s disease
Huntington’s disease
Schizophrenia
Depression

Approach

103

107

584

PUTRI ET AL.

conducted. Differences in the fatty acids lysophosphatidylcholine
(94), phosphatidylcholine (95) and acylcarnitine were observed
between obese and lean subjects. Their results partially revealed
the mechanism underlying hyperlipidemia.
More recently, a large-scale human study of cardiovascular
disease (CVD) was conducted using LC/MS/MS-based metabolomics
(96). The authors chose trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) as a candidate biomarker. The effectiveness of the marker was conﬁrmed by
analyzing TMAO in serum of nearly 2000 patients. TMAO levels
exhibited a dose-dependent association with the risk of CVD and
multiple individual CVD phenotypes, including peripheral artery
disease, coronary artery disease and history of myocardial infarction. This study has shown the potential for clinical application of
biomarkers discovered by metabolomics and is a milestone in the
history of metabolomics.
Cancer Cancer is a leading cause of death worldwide and
accounted for 7.6 million deaths in 2008. Deaths from cancer are
projected to rise to over 11 million by 2030. Because early diagnosis
is required to improve prognosis, discovery of sensitive cancer
biomarkers has become one of the priorities of cancer research.
Denkert and coworkers analyzed invasive carcinomas and
borderline tumors (97) by GC/TOF-MS, and detected 291 metabolites,
of which more than a hundred were annotated. Furthermore, 51
metabolites were signiﬁcantly different between carcinomas and
borderline tumors, and 88% of borderline tumor cells could be
identiﬁed using a supervised prediction model. The authors used the
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes for correlating the
metabolic changes to different pathways and key enzymes. They
found perturbations in the metabolic pathways for glycerolipids,
fatty acids and amino acids in the carcinomas. Metabolomics helps
provide an accurate diagnosis of cancer and provides insight into the
pathogenesis of the disease. Fan et al. used 13C stable isotope
metabolomics using uniformly labeled 13C-glucose as tracers to study
metabolite ﬂux in lung cancer cells (98). Their analysis of lung cancer
tissue from 13C-infused patients revealed that lung cancer cells
contained high amounts of 13C-labeled lactate, alanine, indicating
enhancement of energy production via glycolysis. Generally, glucose
for glycolysis and glutamine for glutaminolysis via the Krebs cycle are
thought to be the major energy resources in cancer cell. However, the
elevated levels of the aspartate isotopomer with three 13C-labeled
carbons and the 13C-2,3-glutamate isotopomer in lung tumor tissues
provides deﬁnitive evidence of the increased production of aspartate
and glutamate from 13C-glucose via glycolysis, anaplerotic pyruvate
carboxylation and the Krebs cycle. Furthermore, the authors
conﬁrmed pyruvate carboxylation activation in tumor tissues by an
increased level of pyruvate carboxylase mRNA and protein. These
ﬁndings suggest that isotopomer-based metabolomics is useful for
understanding the biochemical changes in cancer cells.
Numerous studies have been performed to identify cancerspeciﬁc biomarkers in less-invasive samples. Nishiumi et al. sought
to identify serum biomarkers of pancreatic cancer, which is difﬁcult
to detect and diagnose early (99). The levels of 18 out of 60
metabolites identiﬁed in patients’ sera by GC/MS was signiﬁcantly
different from that of healthy subjects. Furthermore, this difference
was observed even in stage I patients. These results suggest that
screening of early stage pancreatic cancer can be realized by using
serum metabolomics. Researchers have been keen on seeking
biomarkers in non-invasive samples, such as urine (100,101) and
saliva (102). In these studies, in the same fashion of most metabolomic studies of diagnostic method, multivariable analysis and/or
multiple biomarkers were used to enhance sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the method. Taken together, metabolomics is a promising
non-invasive, highly sensitive diagnostic method for cancer.
Central nervous system diseases and psychiatric disorders In
diseases of the central nervous system, it is difﬁcult to establish

J. BIOSCI. BIOENG.,
quantitative diagnostic criteria. Therefore, the most urgent task for
these diseases is to build a biomarker panel for diagnosis and
conﬁrmation of treatment effects.
Holmes et al. applied 1H NMR-based metabolomics to the study
of cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) (103). CSF circulates throughout the
entire central nervous system, thus it is an appropriate target of
neural metabolomics. Their results suggest that there is a dysregulation of glucose homeostasis in the CSF of drug-naive schizophrenics. Application of PLS-DA clearly distinguished the
schizophrenic patients from healthy subjects. Furthermore, the 1H
NMR spectra of over 50% of the patients returned to normal after
antipsychotic drug treatment.
Numerous studies have been conducted using blood, which can
be collected in a less-invasive manner. However, the biochemical
properties of the cerebrospinal ﬂuid are quite different from that of
blood due to the blood-cerebrospinal barrier. The matter of concern
is how perturbations of the brain affect the blood metabolic proﬁle.
Ahmed et al. applied 1H NMR-based metabolomics to Parkinson’s
disease patients (104), revealing that 22 metabolites showed
signiﬁcantly different concentrations compared with healthy
subjects. According to the PLS-DA loading plot, pyruvate is the most
important variable for cluster separation, and the results of gene
expression studies suggest that there is altered expression of
enzymes related to pyruvate metabolism. Furthermore, the application of 1H NMR spectra to neural network algorithms showed
>90% accuracy for prediction of disease progression. Metabolomic
proﬁling using GC/TOF-MS has been applied to Huntington disease
patients and transgenic mice (105). The results indicate that there
are alterations in fatty acid and aliphatic amino acid metabolism in
patients and in a mouse model of the disease. These results clearly
reveal that degeneration in the brain affects the metabolite proﬁle
of blood, despite the blood-cerebrospinal barrier.
A number of researchers have focused on psychiatric diseases,
such as schizophrenia and depression. Schizophrenia is partly
caused by alterations in neuronal membrane phospholipids
and neurotransmitter systems. Weight increase and hypertriglyceridemia are major side effects of anti-schizophrenic medication. Therefore, lipid metabolism seems to be important in
schizophrenia pathogenesis. Kaddurah-Daouk and coworkers
applied the lipidomic method to schizophrenia, targeting >300
lipids, including a wide range of polar and nonpolar molecules (106).
The proﬁle of many lipid species was affected by anti-schizophrenic
drugs. Elevated levels of free fatty acids and triglycerides in plasma
were observed, and the level of phosphatidylethanolamine was
lower, in drug-naive patients compared with healthy controls.
Interestingly, plasma phosphatidylethanolamine was increased by
anti-schizophrenic medication. These results indicate that lipidomic analysis has the potential to identify biomarkers that deﬁne
drug-response phenotypes. Further study with larger sample set
will enable us to elucidate the relationship between therapeutic
beneﬁt and the plasma lipid changes. Metabolomics has also been
applied to depression, for which the etiology is unclear. Li et al. used
chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) rats as a model for
depression, and performed GC/MS-based metabolomic analysis of
the plasma (107). The control and CUMS groups were well
discriminated by PCA, and the loading indicated that the CUMS rats
were perturbed in amino acid metabolism, energy metabolism and
glycometabolism. These results suggest that metabolomic analysis
can detect the biochemical alterations in mood disorders. Thus,
metabolomics is a powerful tool for understanding the pathogenesis of these diseases, and for identifying biomarkers for early
diagnosis, therapeutics and drug toxicity.
Metabolomic analysis of tissues from patients and/or animal
models is a promising approach to reveal pathogenesis of diseases.
Integration of metabolomics with other omics science, more
speciﬁcally, genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics will lead to

VOL. 115, 2013

APPLICATION OF METABOLOMICS

a better understanding of the link between changes that occur in
body and pathological condition. Clariﬁcation of pathogenic
mechanism by metabolomics is expected to be directly connected
with discovery of drug targets. Discovery of highly sensitive,
speciﬁc biomarkers is also one of the deﬁned goals of medical
metabolomics. A number of researches have shown that some of
diagnostic indexes based on multiple metabolite concentration
constricted by metabolomics are superior to conventional
biochemical markers in terms of speciﬁcity and/or sensitivity (108).
Metabolomic approach is expected to discover biomarkers for
diseases which are difﬁcult to set deﬁnite diagnostic criteria such as
psychiatric disease and to diagnose cancer in its early stages
contributing to improve prognosis. Validation of these markers on
a larger cohort of patients will conﬁrm the utility of metabolomics
in clinical science.
METABOLOMICS OF FOOD AND HERBAL MEDICINES
In the ﬁelds of food science and herbal medicines, metabolomics
has emerged as an important tool for evaluating quality and safety
(109). The quality of ﬁnal food products are greatly affected by preharvest (genetic origin, cultivation area and growing environment)
and post-harvest (milling, modiﬁed/controlled and atmosphere
storage) processes (110). Recently, metabolomics has been
employed for quality control, because it is useful for evaluating
multiple factors simultaneously. Although metabolomics
approaches have recently gained popularity in the area of foods and
herbal medicines, sensory evaluation is still the main method used
to assess the quality and taste of foods and herbal medicines.
Sensory evaluation is deﬁned as a scientiﬁc method used to evoke,
measure, analyze and interpret responses to products, as perceived
through the senses of sight, smell, touch, taste and hearing (111).
Sensory evaluation holds great importance in food industry as it
greatly affects the prices and quality of various food products.
However, the reproducibility of sensory evaluation highly depends
on the skill of sensory panels. As training and maintenance of welltrained sensory experts are time-consuming and expensive, an
alternative instrument-based method that is less subjective and
more efﬁcient is needed to complement sensory evaluation. In this
section, we describe the recent applications of metabolomics
techniques for the quality evaluation of food and herbal medicine,
particularly in relation to human senses.
Metabolomics have been applied for the analysis of major crops
[potato (112), tomato (113), cereals (114) and fruits (115)] and
popular beverages (wine (116) and beer (117)). A summary of
references of this part can be seen in Table 4 (117e127). There are
two concepts on applications of food metabolomics, mimicking
human senses and cataloging taste-active compounds. In order to

585

mimic ﬁve canonical senses: sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell,
electronic sensors have achieved a remarkable breakthrough (128).
Main target of food assessment by electronic sensors are alcohols,
such as beer (129) and wine (130). Recently, electric sensors
conjunction with MS-based instruments (118) has been employed
to evaluate food quality. Combinations of electronic sensors and
MS-based instruments will be important tools toward improvement of food metabolomics. Another growing application of food
metabolomics is sensomics, in which the main objective is to
discover the key players imparting the attractive taste of foods
(119,131). In order to identify and catalog taste-active metabolites,
omics technology has been frequently employed. Metabolomics
technology helps to understand the complexity of human sense to
evaluate food quality.
Multivariate analyses were used to identify the relationship
between metabolite proﬁles of food and quality as assessed by
professional sensory panels. For example, PLS-based models have
been used to examine the relationship between green tea metabolites and quality, with FT/NIR (120), NMR (121), GC/MS (122), and
UPLC/MS (123) techniques being employed. In addition, the electronic tongue was used in combination with principal component
analysis (PCA) for the classiﬁcation of Chinese tea samples of
different geographical origins and quality grades by professional
tasters (132). Various analytical instruments and multivariate
analyses have been used to characterize the sensory properties of
green tea. These reports show that combinations of instrument
data and multivariate analyses are promising tools for the future of
sensory chemistry.
In the area of herbal medicines, which is closely related with
food, metabolomics is expected to resolve the special issues of
traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) and focus on biomarker
discovery (133). In the market, it is difﬁcult to assess quality of
herbal medicines by the quantities of the various constituents
because of interaction like synergistic effect. Therefore, sensory
tests remain practically important for deciding quality and price.
However, only a few studies (134e137) have been conducted to
assess sensory quality of herbal medicines. Therefore, further
research on sensory analysis is still required for the herbal medicine
industry.
A combination of sensory and instrumental data has the
potential to improve quality control procedures for herbal medicines. Thus, to study the relationship between metabolic proﬁling
and quality ranking, metabolomics analyses using NMR (124), GC/
MS (125), pyrolysis GC/MS (126) and UPLC/MS (127) have been
applied to Angelica acutiloba. Recently, the relationship between
content of pharmacological components and the grade of Angelicae
Radix was documented, although only some ligustilides and furocoumarin were assessed (138). Comprehensive analyses of herbal

TABLE 4. Summary of food and herbal medicine metabolomics applications cited in this review.
Material
Potato
Tomato
Cereals (rice)
Fruits (melon)
Wine
Beer
Wine
Beer
Green tea
Green tea
Green tea
Green tea
Angelica acutiloba
A. acutiloba
A. acutiloba
A. acutiloba

Method

Approach

Application

Reference

LC/MS
GC/MS, LC/MS
GC/MS
GC/MS
HPLC/MS
NMR
EN/MS
LC-MS/MS
FT/NIR
NMR
Pyrolysis GC/MS
UPLC/MS
NMR
GC/MS
Pyrolysis GC/MS
UPLC/MS

Random forest regression
PCA, PLS
PCA
PCA
PCA, PLS-DA
PCA, PLS-DA
PCA, PLS-DA, SLDA
PCA
PLS
PCA, PLS
PLS
PCA, PLS
PLS, PLS-DA
PCA
PCA, PLS-DA
PCA, PLS-DA

Construction of networks integrating gene expression, metabolites and phenotypic traits
Determination of key metabolites as /efﬁcient predictors
Distinction of biological variability
Distinction and characterization of varieties
Distinction of varieties and geographical origins
Determination of the chemical changes
Prediction of the geographical origin
Determination of the change of bitter compounds during storage
Classiﬁcation of quality
Classiﬁcation and search of biomarkers of quality
Classiﬁcation and search of biomarkers of quality
Classiﬁcation and search of biomarkers of quality
Classiﬁcation of geographical origins, variety differences and quality
Classiﬁcation of geographical origins, variety differences and quality
Classiﬁcation of geographical origins, variety differences and quality
Classiﬁcation of geographical origins, variety differences and quality

112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127

586

PUTRI ET AL.

J. BIOSCI. BIOENG.,

medicines, e.g., using metabolomics techniques, are required for
both pharmaceutical and industrial purposes. Further research is
required, not only to determine genetic origin and cultivation
conditions, but also to identify compounds that affect quality.
Metabolomics techniques are effective tools to assess food
quality. The studies of food metabolomics include sensory evaluation, investigation of taste-active compounds and the development
of instruments mimicking the human senses. In particular,
metabolomics can identify important components assessed by
sensory evaluation by combining the metabolome information
derived from instruments and professional sensory evaluation
scores. Products, such as wine, coffee and green tea, that are usually
ranked by sensory evaluation, are of particular interest for such
studies. Metabolomics techniques will continue to assist
researchers in ﬁnding a scientiﬁc method to determine the real
quality of food. In assessment of herbal medicines, one of the most
important goals is to analyze pharmacological and adverse (toxic)
effects. Currently, it is a challenging task to technically to assess and
deﬁne all active compounds in all raw materials. Therefore,
prediction of sensory tests by metabolomics technology is essential
to evaluate quality of herbal medicine because sensory test is
a practical method in the market. Ultimately metabolomics should
lead to the establishment of a robust and reliable method for
quality control. In the future, technological advances in instrument
development and data processing methods in metabolomics
should lead to the establishment of a more practical scientiﬁc
assessment of sensory chemistry.
CONCLUSION
This review describes in detail the recent progress in metabolomics application in various ﬁelds. Snapshot metabolomics is
a high-resolution phenotype analysis tool that is very useful for
revealing silent phenotypes in microorganisms. Stable isotope
dilution is also used in quantitative analysis and for dynamic
observation. Studies focusing on development of methods in
microbes will remain invaluable for method development in the
study of higher organisms.
Plant metabolomics is a key technology for understanding
cellular systems and for decoding the function of genes. In many
cases, plant metabolomics is integrated with genomics, transcriptomics and proteomics. Metabolomics technology has also
been applied to the breeding of commercially important crops.
Metabolomics should be useful for QTL analysis of m-traits, such as
the level of variable constituents. Annotation of metabolomics
signals is one of the remaining problems to be resolved for further
progression of metabolomics research. Particularly, in plant
metabolomics, secondary metabolite annotation is a very important procedure and technical improvements are expected in this
area.
In animal metabolomics, discoveries in early development are
thoroughly discussed. Zebra ﬁsh, fruit ﬂy and nematode are given
as examples of model organisms. Accumulation of metabolome
data for various model organisms should further animal science.
Metabolomics is obviously useful for medical research. The relationship between metabolic perturbations and disease is discussed,
with a focus on cancer, the most signiﬁcant research target of
medical metabolomics. Metabolomic approach is expected to
discover biomarkers for diseases which are difﬁcult to set deﬁnite
diagnostic criteria such as psychiatric disease and to diagnose
cancer in its early stages contributing to improve prognosis.
Finally, application of metabolomics for foods and herbal
medicines are reviewed. Chemometrics techniques have been used
for food characterization, in which gas chromatography and near
infrared spectroscopy are employed. Recently, the newest metabolomics technologies have been applied to food characterization. In

particular, sensory assessment of food by skilled human evaluators
has been examined using metabolic ﬁngerprinting methodology.
In recent years, the usefulness of metabolomics as applied to
various ﬁelds of life science has become apparent. In addition to
providing experimental data for identifying unknown and underappreciated reactions in the metabolic network, metabolomics has
also emerged as a powerful tool for quantitatively predicting
physiological traits. By identifying the metabolites important to the
trait, crucial information can be gleaned regarding the underlying
molecular mechanisms contributing to the phenotype in question.
Elucidation of such molecular mechanisms or pathways will be of
tremendous use in metabolic engineering aiming at modifying
these phenotypes in various target organisms.

References
1. Fukusaki, E. and Kobayashi, A.: Plant metabolomics: potential for practical
operation, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 100, 347e354 (2005).
2. Ryan, D. and Robards, K.: Metabolomics: the greatest omics of them all?
Anal. Chem., 78, 7954e7958 (2006).
3. Canelas, A. B., Ras, C., Pierick, A., Dam, J. C., Heijnen, J. J., and Gulik, W. M.:
Leakage-free rapid quenching technique for yeast metabolomics, Metabolomics, 4, 226e239 (2008).
4. Winder, C. L., Dunn, W. B., Schuler, S., Broadhurst, D., Jarvis, R.,
Stephens, G. M., and Goodacre, R.: Global metabolic proﬁling of Escherichia
coli cultures: an evaluation of methods for quenching and extraction of
intracellular metabolites, Anal. Chem., 80, 2939e2948 (2008).
5. Ewald, J. C., Heux, S., and Zamboni, N.: High-throughput quantitative
metabolomics: workﬂow for cultivation, quenching, and analysis of yeast in
a multiwell format, Anal. Chem., 81, 3623e3629 (2009).
6. van Gulik, W. M.: Fast sampling for quantitative microbial metabolomics,
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 21, 27e34 (2010).
7. Shin, M. H., Lee, D. Y., Liu, K.-H., Fiehn, O., and Kim, K. H.: Evaluation of
sampling and extraction methodologies for the global metabolic proﬁling of
Saccharophagus degradans, Anal. Chem., 82, 6660e6666 (2010).
8. Raamsdonk, L. M., Teusink, B., Broadhurst, D., Zhang, N., Hayes, A.,
Walsh, M. C., Berden, J. A., Brindle, K. M., Kell, D. B., Rowland, J. J., and other
3 authors: A functional genomics strategy that uses metabolome data to
reveal the phenotype of silent mutations, Nat. Biotechnol., 19, 45e50 (2001).
9. Ohashi, Y., Hirayama, A., Ishikawa, T., Nakamura, S., Shimizu, K., Ueno, Y.,
Tomita, M., and Soga, T.: Depiction of metabolome changes in histidinestarved Escherichia coli by CE-TOFMS, Mol. Biosyst., 4, 135e147 (2008).
10. Wittmann, C., Krömer, J. O., Kiefer, P., Binz, T., and Heinzle, E.: Impact of the
cold shock phenomenon on quantiﬁcation of intracellular metabolites in
bacteria, Anal. Biochem., 327, 135e139 (2004).
11. Soga, T., Ueno, Y., Naraoka, H., Ohashi, Y., Tomita, M., and Nishioka, T.:
Simultaneous determination of anionic intermediates for Bacillus subtilis
metabolic pathways by capillary electrophoresis electrospray ionization mass
spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 74, 2233e2239 (2002).
12. Bolten, C. J. and Wittmann, C.: Appropriate sampling for intracellular amino
acid analysis in ﬁve phylogenetically different yeasts, Biotechnol. Lett., 30,
1993e2000 (2008).
13. Taymaz-Nikerel, H., de Mey, M., Ras, C., ten Pierick, A., Seifar, R. M., van
Dam, J. C., Heijnen, J. J., and van Gulik, W. M.: Development and application
of a differential method for reliable metabolome analysis in Escherichia coli,
Anal. Biochem., 386, 9e19 (2009).
14. Bolten, C. J., Kiefer, P., Letisse, F., Portais, J.-C., and Wittmann, C.: Sampling
for metabolome analysis of microorganisms, Anal. Chem., 79, 3843e3849
(2007).
15. Maharjan, R. P. and Ferenci, T.: Global metabolite analysis: the inﬂuence of
extraction methodology on metabolome proﬁles of Escherichia coli, Anal.
Biochem., 313, 145e154 (2003).
16. Canelas, A. B., ten Pierick, A., Ras, C., Seifar, R. M., van Dam, J. C., van
Gulik, W. M., and Heijnen, J. J.: Quantitative evaluation of intracellular
metabolite extraction techniques for yeast metabolomics, Anal. Chem., 81,
7379e7389 (2009).
17. Yoshida, R., Tamura, T., Takaoka, C., Harada, K., Kobayashi, A., Mukai, Y.,
and Fukusaki, E.: Metabolomics-based systematic prediction of yeast lifespan
and its application for semi-rational screening of ageing-related mutants,
Aging Cell, 9, 616e625 (2010).
18. Bennett, B. D., Kimball, E. H., Gao, M., Osterhout, R., Van, Dien, S. J., and
Rabinowitz, J. D.: Absolute metabolite concentrations and implied enzyme
active site occupancy in Escherichia coli, Nat. Chem. Biol., 8, 593e599 (2009).
19. Clasquin, M. F., Melamud, E., Singer, A., Gooding, J. R., Xu, X., Dong, A.,
Cui, H., Campagna, S. R., Savchenko, A., Yakunin, A. F., Rabinowitz, J. D.,
and Caudy, A. A.: Riboneogenesis in yeast, Cell, 145, 969e980 (2011).

VOL. 115, 2013
20. Li, X., Gianoulis, T. A., Yip, K. Y., Gerstein, M., and Snyder, M.: Extensive in
vivo metabolite-protein interactions revealed by large-scale systematic
analyses, Cell, 143, 639e650 (2010).
21. Allen, J., Davey, H. M., Broadhurst, D., Heald, J. K., Rowland, J. J., Oliver, S. G.,
and Kell, D. B.: High-throughput classiﬁcation of yeast mutants for functional
genomics using metabolic footprinting, Nat. Biotechnol., 21, 692e696 (2003).
22. Nakanishi, Y., Fukuda, S., Chikayama, E., Kimura, Y., Ohno, H., and
Kikuchi, J.: Dynamic omics approach identiﬁes nutrition-mediated microbial
interactions, J. Proteome Res., 10, 824e836 (2010).
23. Tweeddale, H., Notley-McRobb, L., and Ferenci, T.: Effect of slow growth on
metabolism of Escherichia coli, as revealed by global metabolite pool
(“metabolome”) analysis, J. Bacteriol., 180, 5109e5116 (1998).
24. Yuan, J., Doucette, C. D., Fowler, W. U., Feng, X.-J., Piazza, M., Rabitz, H. A.,
Wingreen, N. S., and Rabinowitz, J. D.: Metabolomics-driven quantitative
analysis of ammonia assimilation in E. coli, Mol. Syst. Biol., 5, 302 (2009).
25. Yukihira, D., Miura, D., Saito, K., Takahashi, K., and Wariishi, H.:
MALDIeMS-based high-throughput metabolite analysis for intracellular
metabolic dynamics, Anal. Chem., 82, 4278e4282 (2010).
26. Nöh, K., Grönke, K., Luo, B., Takors, R., Oldiges, M., and Wiechert, W.:
Metabolic ﬂux analysis at ultra short time scale: isotopically non-stationary
13
C labeling experiments, J. Biotechnol., 129, 249e267 (2007).
27. Fendt, S.-M., Buescher, J. M., Rudroff, F., Picotti, P., Zamboni, N., and
Sauer, U.: Tradeoff between enzyme and metabolite efﬁciency maintains
metabolic homeostasis upon perturbations in enzyme capacity, Mol. Syst.
Biol., 6, 356 (2010).
28. Yoshida, S., Imoto, J., Minato, T., Oouchi, R., Sugihara, M., Imai, T.,
Ishiguro, T., Mizutani, S., Tomita, M., Soga, T., and Yoshimoto, H.: Development of bottom-fermenting Saccharomyces strains that produce high SO2
levels, using integrated metabolome and transcriptome analysis, Appl.
Environ. Microbiol., 74, 2787e2796 (2008).
29. Hasunuma, T., Sanda, T., Yamada, R., Yoshimura, K., Ishii, J., and Kondo, A.:
Metabolic pathway engineering based on metabolomics confers acetic and
formic acid tolerance to a recombinant xylose-fermenting strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Microb. Cell Fact., 10, 2 (2011).
30. Villas-Bôas, S. G., Kesson, M., and Nielsen, J.: Biosynthesis of glyoxylate from
glycine in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, FEMS Yeast Res., 5, 703e709 (2005).
31. Zhou, J., Ma, Q., Yi, H., Wang, L., Song, H., and Yuan, Y. J.: Metabolome
proﬁling reveals metabolic cooperation between Bacillus megaterium and
Ketogulonicigenium vulgare during induced swarm motility, Appl. Environ.
Microbiol., 77, 7023e7030 (2011).
32. Weckwerth, W., Loureiro, M. E., Wenzel, K., and Fiehn, O.: Differential
metabolic networks unravel the effects of silent plant phenotypes, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 7809e7814 (2004).
33. Camacho, D., Fuente, A., and Mendes, P.: The origin of correlations in
metabolome data, Metabolomics, 1, 53e63 (2005).
34. Saito, K. and Matsuda, F.: Metabolomics for functional genomics, systems
biology, and biotechnology, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 61, 463e489 (2010).
35. Hirai, M. Y., Yano, M., Goodenowe, D. B., Kanaya, S., Kimura, T.,
Awazuhara, M., Arita, M., Fujiwara, T., and Saito, K.: Integration of transcriptomics and metabolomics for understanding of global responses to
nutritional stresses in Arabidopsis thaliana, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 101,
10205e10210 (2004).
36. Nikiforova, V. J., Kopka, J., Tolstikov, V., Fiehn, O., Hopkins, L.,
Hawkesford, M. J., Hesse, H., and Hoefgen, R.: Systems rebalancing of
metabolism in response to sulfur deprivation, as revealed by metabolome
analysis of arabidopsis plants, Plant Physiol., 138, 304e318 (2005).
37. Broeckling, C. D., Huhman, D. V., Farag, M. A., Smith, J. T., May, G. D.,
Mendes, P., Dixon, R. A., and Sumner, L. W.: Metabolic proﬁling of medicago
truncatula cell cultures reveals the effects of biotic and abiotic elicitors on
metabolism, J. Exp. Bot., 56, 323e336 (2005).
38. Dubouzet, J. G., Ishihara, A., Matsuda, F., Miyagawa, H., Iwata, H., and
Wakasa, K.: Integrated metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses of hightryptophan rice expressing a mutant anthranilate synthase alpha subunit,
J. Exp. Bot., 58, 3309e3321 (2007).
39. Hirai, M. Y., Sugiyama, K., Sawada, Y., Tohge, T., Obayashi, T., Suzuki, A.,
Araki, R., Sakurai, N., Suzuki, H., Aoki, K., and other 3 authors: Omics-based
identiﬁcation of Arabidopsis myb transcription factors regulating aliphatic
glucosinolate biosynthesis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 6478e6483 (2007).
40. Sawada, Y., Kuwahara, A., Nagano, M., Narisawa, T., Sakata, A., Saito, K., and
Hirai, M. Y.: Omics-based approaches to methionine side chain elongation in
Arabidopsis: characterization of the genes encoding methylthioalkylmalate
isomerase and methylthioalkylmalate dehydrogenase, Plant Cell Physiol., 50,
1181e1190 (2009).
41. Rischer, H., Oresic, M., Seppanen-Laakso, T., Katajamaa, M., Lammertyn, F.,
Ardiles-Diaz, W., Van Montagu, M. C., Inze, D., Oksman-Caldentey, K. M.,
and Goossens, A.: Gene-to-metabolite networks for terpenoid indole alkaloid
biosynthesis in Catharanthus roseus cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 103,
5614e5619 (2006).
42. Zulak, K. G., Cornish, A., Daskalchuk, T. E., Deyholos, M. K.,
Goodenowe, D. B., Gordon, P. M., Klassen, D., Pelcher, L. E., Sensen, C. W.,

APPLICATION OF METABOLOMICS

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.
60.

61.

62.

587

and Facchini, P. J.: Gene transcript and metabolite proﬁling of elicitorinduced opium poppy cell cultures reveals the coordinate regulation of
primary and secondary metabolism, Planta, 225, 1085e1106 (2007).
Matsuda, F., Hirai, M. Y., Sasaki, E., Akiyama, K., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K.,
Provart, N. J., Sakurai, T., Shimada, Y., and Saito, K.: Atmetexpress development: a phytochemical atlas of Arabidopsis development, Plant Physiol.,
152, 566e578 (2010).
Schmid, M., Davison, T. S., Henz, S. R., Pape, U. J., Demar, M., Vingron, M.,
Scholkopf, B., Weigel, D., and Lohmann, J. U.: A gene expression map of
Arabidopsis thaliana development, Nat. Genet., 37, 501e506 (2005).
Gilliland, L. U., Magallanes-Lundback, M., Hemming, C., Hemming, C.,
Supplee, A., Koornneef, M., Bentsink, L., and DellaPenna, D.: Genetic basis
for natural variation in seed vitamin E levels in Arabidopsis thaliana, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 103, 18834e18841 (2006).
Schauer, N., Semel, Y., Balbo, I., Steinfath, M., Repsilber, D., Selbig, J.,
Pleban, T., Zamir, D., and Fernie, R. A.: Mode of inheritance of primary
metabolic traits in tomato, Plant Cell, 20, 509e523 (2008).
Schauer, N., Semel, Y., Roessner, U., Gur, A., Balbo, I., Carrari, F., Pleban, T.,
Perez-Meliz, A., Bruedigam, C., Kopka, J., and other 3 authors: Comprehensive metabolic proﬁling and phenotyping of interspeciﬁc introgression
lines for tomato improvement, Nat. Biotechnol., 24, 447e454 (2006).
Lisec, J., Meyer, R. C., Steinfath, M., Redestig, H., Becher, M., WituchkaWall, H., Fiehn, W., Torjek, O., Selbig, J., Altmann, T., and
Willmitzer, L.: Identiﬁcation of metabolic and biomass QTL in Arabidopsis thaliana in a parallel analysis of RIL and IL populations, Plant J.,
53, 960e972 (2008).
Brotman, Y., Riewe, D., Lisec, J., Meyer, R. C., Willmitzer, L., and
Altmann, T.: Identiﬁcation of enzymatic and regulatory genes of plant
metabolism through QTL analysis in Arabidopsis, J. Plant Physiol., 168,
1387e1394 (2011).
Riedelsheimer, C., Angelika, C., Grieder, C., Lisec, J., Technow, F., Sulpice, R.,
Altmann, T., Still, M., Willmitzer, L., and Melchinger, A. E.: Genomic and
metabolic prediction of complex heterotic traits in hybrid maize, Nat. Genet.,
44, 217e220 (2012).
Matsuda, F., Okazaki, Y., Oikawa, A., Kusano, M., Nakabayashi, R.,
Kikuchi, J., Yonemaru, J.-I., Ebana, K., Yano, M., and Saito, K.: Dissection of
genotypeephenotype associations in rice grains using metabolome quantitative trait loci analysis, Plant J., 70, 624e636 (2012).
Rischer, H. and Oksman-Caldentey, K. M.: Unintended effects in genetically
modiﬁed crops: revealed by metabolomics? Trends Biotechnol., 24, 102e104
(2006).
Catchpole, G. S., Beckmann, M., Enot, D. P., Mondhe, M., Zywicki, B.,
Taylor, J., Hardy, N., Smith, A., King, R. D., Kell, D. B., Fiehn, O., and
Draper, J.: Hierarchical metabolomics demonstrates substantial compositional similarity between genetically modiﬁed and conventional potato crops,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 102, 14458e14462 (2005).
Kusano, M., Redestig, H., Hirai, T., Oikawa, A., Matsuda, F., Fukushima, A.,
Arita, M., Watanabe, S., Yano, M., Hiwasa-Tanase, K., Ezura, H., and
Saito, K.: Covering chemical diversity of genetically-modiﬁed tomatoes using
metabolomics for objective substantial equivalence assessment, PLoS One, 6,
e16989 (2011).
Iijima, Y., Nakamura, Y., Ogata, Y., Tanaka, K., Sakurai, N., Suda, K.,
Suzuki, T., Suzuki, H., Okazaki, K., Kitayama, M., and other 3 authors:
Metabolite annotations based on the integration of mass spectral information,
Plant J., 54, 949e962 (2008).
Bottcher, C., Roepenack-Lahaye, E. V., Schmidt, J., Schmotz, C.,
Neumann, S., Scheel, D., and Clemens, S.: Metabolome analysis of biosynthetic mutants reveals diversity of metabolic changes and allows identiﬁcation of a large number of new compounds in Arabidopsis thaliana, Plant
Physiol., 147, 2107e2120 (2008).
Matsuda, F., Nakabayashi, R., Sawada, Y., Suzuki, M., Hirai, M. Y., Kanaya, S.,
and Saito, K.: Mass spectra-based framework for automated structural
elucidation of metabolome data to explore phytochemical diversity, Front.
Plant Sci., 2, 40 (2011).
Shinbo, V., Nakamura, Y., Altaf-Ul-Amin, M., Asahi, H., Kurokawa, K.,
Arita, M., Saito, K., Ohta, D., Shibata, D., and Kanaya, S.: KNApSAcK:
a comprehensive species-metabolite relationship database, pp. 165e184, in:
Saito, K., Dixon, R. A., and Willmitzer, L. (Eds.), Biotechnology in agriculture
and forestry 57 plant metabolomics. Springer, Heidelberg (2006).
Kind, T. and Fiehn, O.: Advances in structure elucidation of small molecules
using mass spectrometry, Bioanal. Rev., 2, 23e60 (2010).
Matsuda, F., Yonekura-Sakakibara, K., Niida, R., Kuromori, T., Shinozaki, K.,
and Saito, K.: MS/MS spectral tag (MS2T)-based annotation of non-targeted
proﬁle of plant secondary metabolites, Plant J., 57, 555e577 (2009).
Horai, H., Arita, M., Kanaya, S., Nihei, Y., Ikeda, T., Suwa, K., Ojima, Y.,
Tanaka, K., Tanaka, S., Aoshima, K., and other 25 authors: MassBank:
a public repository for sharing mass spectral data for life sciences, J. Mass.
Spectrom., 45, 703e714 (2010).
Matsuda, F., Shinbo, Y., Oikawa, A., Hira, M. Y., Fiehn, O., Kanaya, S., and
Saito, K.: Assessment of metabolome annotation quality: a method for

588

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.
70.

71.
72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.
79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

PUTRI ET AL.
evaluating the false discovery rate of elemental composition searches, PLoS
One, 4, e7490 (2009).
Hill, A. J., Teraoka, H., Heideman, W., and Peterson, R. E.: Zebraﬁsh as
a model vertebrate for investigating chemical toxicity, Toxicol. Sci., 86, 6e19
(2005).
Hoffmann, J. L., Torontali, S. P., Thomason, R. G., Lee, D. M., Brill, J. L.,
Price, B. B., Carr, G. J., and Versteeg, D. J.: Hepatic gene expression proﬁling
using Genechips in zebraﬁsh exposed to 17alpha-ethynylestradiol, Aquat.
Toxicol., 79, 233e246 (2006).
Notch, E. G., Miniutti, D. M., and Mayer, G. D.: 17alpha-Ethinylestradiol
decreases expression of multiple hepatic nucleotide excision repair genes in
zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio), Aquat. Toxicol., 84, 301e309 (2007).
Hayashi, S., Akiyama, S., Tamaru, Y., Takeda, Y., Fujiwara, T., Inoue, K.,
Kobayashi, A., Maegawa, S., and Fukusaki, E.: A novel application of
metabolomics in vertebrate development, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.,
386, 268e272 (2009).
Hayashi, S., Yoshida, M., Fujiwara, T., Maegawa, S., and Fukusaki, E.: Singleembryo metabolomics and systematic prediction of developmental stage in
zebraﬁsh, Z. Naturforsch. C, 66, 191e198 (2011).
Ong, E. S., Chor, C. F., Zou, L., and Ong, C. N.: A multi-analytical approach for
metabolomic proﬁling of zebraﬁsh (Danio rerio) livers, Mol. Biosyst., 5,
288e298 (2009).
Press, H., York, N., and Nw, A.: Genome sequence of the nematode C. elegans:
a platform for investigating biology, Science, 282, 2012e2018 (1998).
Kamath, R. S., Fraser, A. G., Dong, Y., Poulin, G., Durbin, R., Gotta, M.,
Kanapin, A., Le Bot, N., Moreno, S., Sohrmann, M., and other 3 authors:
Systematic functional analysis of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome using
RNAi, Nature, 421, 231e237 (2003).
Johnson, T. E.: Caenorhabditis elegans 2007: the premier model for the study
of aging, Exp. Gerontol., 43, 1e4 (2008).
Atherton, H. J., Jones, O. A. H., Malik, S., Miska, E. A., and Grifﬁn, J. L.:
A comparative metabolomic study of NHR-49 in Caenorhabditis elegans and
PPAR-alpha in the mouse, FEBS Lett., 582, 1661e1666 (2008).
Tampakakis, E., Okoli, I., and Mylonakis, E.: A C. elegans-based, whole
animal, in vivo screen for the identiﬁcation of antifungal compounds, Nat.
Protoc., 3, 1925e1931 (2008).
Leung, M. C. K., Williams, P. L., Benedetto, A., Au, C., Helmcke, K. J.,
Aschner, M., and Meyer, J. N.: Caenorhabditis elegans: an emerging model in
biomedical and environmental toxicology, Toxicol. Sci., 106, 5e28 (2008).
Hughes, S. L., Bundy, J. G., Want, E. J., Kille, P., and Stürzenbaum, S. R.: The
metabolomic responses of Caenorhabditis elegans to cadmium are largely
independent of metallothionein status, but dominated by changes in cystathionine and phytochelatins, J. Proteome Res., 8, 3512e3519 (2009).
Lai, C.-H.: Identiﬁcation of novel human genes evolutionarily conserved in
Caenorhabditis elegans by comparative proteomics, Genome Res., 10, 703e713
(2000).
Falk, M. J., Zhang, Z., Rosenjack, J. R., Nissim, I., Daikhin, E., Nissim, I.,
Sedensky, M. M., Yudkoff, M., and Morgan, P. G.: Metabolic pathway
proﬁling of mitochondrial respiratory chain mutants in C. elegans, Mol. Genet.
Metab., 93, 388e397 (2008).
Grotewiel, M. S., Martin, I., Bhandari, P., and Cook-Wiens, E.: Functional
senescence in Drosophila melanogaster, Ageing Res. Rev., 4, 372e397 (2005).
Pedra, J. H. F., McIntyre, L. M., Scharf, M. E., and Pittendrigh, B. R.: Genomewide transcription proﬁle of ﬁeld- and laboratory-selected dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT)-resistant Drosophila, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 101, 7034e7039 (2004).
Arbeitman, M. N., Furlong, E. E. M., Imam, F., Johnson, E., Null, B. H.,
Baker, B. S., Krasnow, M. A., Scott, M. P., Davis, R. W., and White, K. P.: Gene
expression during the life cycle of Drosophila melanogaster, Science, 297,
2270e2275 (2002).
Li, H.-M., Buczkowski, G., Mittapalli, O., Xie, J., Wu, J., Westerman, R.,
Schemerhorn, B. J., Murdock, L. L., and Pittendrigh, B. R.: Transcriptomic
proﬁles of Drosophila melanogaster third instar larval midgut and responses to
oxidative stress, Insect Mol. Biol., 17, 325e339 (2008).
Girardot, F., Monnier, V., and Tricoire, H.: Genome wide analysis of common
and speciﬁc stress responses in adult Drosophila melanogaster, BMC Genomics,
5, 74 (2004).
Zinke, I., Schütz, C. S., Katzenberger, J. D., Bauer, M., and Pankratz, M. J.:
Nutrient control of gene expression in Drosophila: microarray analysis of
starvation and sugar-dependent response, EMBO J., 21, 6162e6173 (2002).
Sun, W., Margam, V. M., Sun, L., Buczkowski, G., Bennett, G. W.,
Schemerhorn, B., Muir, W. M., and Pittendrigh, B. R.: Genome-wide analysis
of phenobarbital-inducible genes in Drosophila melanogaster, Insect Mol. Biol.,
15, 455e464 (2006).
Pedersen, K. S., Kristensen, T. N., Loeschcke, V., Petersen, B. O., Duus, J.Ø.,
Nielsen, N. C., and Malmendal, A.: Metabolomic signatures of inbreeding at
benign and stressful temperatures in Drosophila melanogaster, Genetics, 180,
1233e1243 (2008).
Malmendal, A., Overgaard, J., Bundy, J. G., Sørensen, J. G., Nielsen, N. C.,
Loeschcke, V., and Holmstrup, M.: Metabolomic proﬁling of heat stress:

J. BIOSCI. BIOENG.,

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

hardening and recovery of homeostasis in Drosophila, Am. J. Physiol. Regul.
Integr. Comp. Physiol., 291, 205e212 (2006).
Overgaard, J., Malmendal, A. M., Sorensen, J. G., Bundy, J. G., Loeschcke, V.,
Nielsen, N., and Holmstrup, M.: Metabolomic proﬁling of rapid cold hardening and cold shock in Drosophila melanogaster, J. Insect Physiol., 53,
1218e1232 (2007).
Coquin, L., Feala, J. D., McCulloch, A. D., and Paternostro, G.: Metabolomic
and ﬂux-balance analysis of age-related decline of hypoxia tolerance in
Drosophila muscle tissue, Mol. Syst. Biol., 4, 233 (2008).
Kamleh, M. A., Hobani, Y., Dow, J. A., Zheng, L., and Watson, D. G.: Towards
a platform for the metabonomic proﬁling of different strains of Drosophila
melanogaster using liquid chromatography-Fourier transform mass spectrometry, FEBS J., 276, 6798e6809 (2009).
Sabatine, M. S., Liu, E., Morrow, D. A., Heller, E., McCarroll, R., Wiegand, R.,
Berriz, G. F., Roth, F. P., and Gerszten, R. E.: Metabolomic identiﬁcation of
novel biomarkers of myocardial ischemia, Circulation, 112, 3868e3875
(2005).
Teul, J., Rupérez, F. J., Garcia, A., Vaysse, J., Balayssac, S., Gilard, V., MaletMartino, M., Martin-Ventura, J. L., Blanco-Colio, L. M., Tuñón, J., Egido, J.,
and Barbas, C.: Improving metabolite knowledge in stable atherosclerosis
patients by association and correlation of GC-MS and 1H NMR ﬁngerprints,
J. Proteome Res., 8, 5580e5589 (2009).
Connor, S. C., Hansen, M. K., Corner, A., Smith, R. F., and Ryan, T. E.: Integration of metabolomics and transcriptomics data to aid biomarker discovery
in type 2 diabetes, Mol. Biosyst., 6, 909e921 (2010).
Suhre, K., Meisinger, C., Döring, A., Altmaier, E., Belcredi, P., Gieger, C.,
Chang, D., Milburn, M. V., Gall, W. E., Weinberger, K. M., and other 6
authors: Metabolic footprint of diabetes: a multiplatform metabolomics
study in an epidemiological setting, PLoS One, 5, e13953 (2010).
Kim, H.-J., Kim, J. H., Noh, S., Hur, H. J., Sung, M. J., Hwang, J.-T., Park, J. H.,
Yang, H. J., Kim, M.-S., Kwon, D. Y., and Yoon, S. H.: Metabolomic analysis of
livers and serum from high-fat diet induced obese mice, J. Proteome Res., 10,
722e731 (2011).
Oberbach, A., Blüher, M., Wirth, H., Till, H., Kovacs, P., Kullnick, Y.,
Schlichting, N., Tomm, J. M., Rolle-Kampczyk, U., Murugaiyan, J., and other
3 authors: Combined proteomic and metabolomic proﬁling of serum reveals
association of the complement system with obesity and identiﬁes novel
markers of body fat mass changes, J. Proteome Res., 10, 4769e4788 (2011).
Wang, Z., Klipfell, E., Bennett, B. J., Koeth, R., Levison, B. S., DuGar, B.,
Feldstein, A. E., Britt, E. B., Fu, X., Chung, Y.-M., and other 8 authors: Gut
ﬂora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease,
Nature, 472, 57e63 (2011).
Denkert, C., Budczies, J., Kind, T., Weichert, W., Tablack, P., Sehouli, J.,
Niesporek, S., Könsgen, D., Dietel, M., and Fiehn, O.: Mass spectrometrybased metabolic proﬁling reveals different metabolite patterns in invasive
ovarian carcinomas and ovarian borderline tumors. Cancer Res., 66,
10795e10804 (2006).
Fan, T. W. M., Lane, A. N., Higashi, R. M., Farag, M. A., Gao, H., Bousamra, M.,
and Miller, D. M.: Altered regulation of metabolic pathways in human lung
cancer discerned by (13)C stable isotope-resolved metabolomics (SIRM), Mol.
Cancer, 8, 41 (2009).
Nishiumi, S., Shinohara, M., Ikeda, A., Yoshie, T., Hatano, N., Kakuyama, S.,
Mizuno, S., Sanuki, T., Kutsumi, H., Fukusaki, E., and other 3 authors:
Serum metabolomics as a novel diagnostic approach for pancreatic cancer,
Metabolomics, 6, 518e528 (2010).
Wu, H., Xue, R., Dong, L., Liu, T., Deng, C., Zeng, H., and Shen, X.: Metabolomic proﬁling of human urine in hepatocellular carcinoma patients using
gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, Anal. Chim. Acta, 648, 98e104
(2009).
Qiu, Y., Cai, G., Su, M., Chen, T., Liu, Y., Xu, Y., Ni, Y., Zhao, A., Cai, S., Xu, L. X.,
and Jia, W.: Urinary metabonomic study on colorectal cancer, J. Proteome
Res., 9, 1627e1634 (2010).
Sugimoto, M., Wong, D. T., Hirayama, A., Soga, T., and Tomita, M.: Capillary
electrophoresis mass spectrometry-based saliva metabolomics identiﬁed oral,
breast and pancreatic cancer-speciﬁc proﬁles, Metabolomics, 6, 78e95 (2010).
Holmes, E., Tsang, T. M., Huang, J. T.-J., Leweke, F. M., Koethe, D.,
Gerth, C. W., Nolden, B. M., Gross, S., Schreiber, D., Nicholson, J. K., and
Bahn, S.: Metabolic proﬁling of CSF: evidence that early intervention may
impact on disease progression and outcome in schizophrenia, PLoS Med., 3,
e327 (2006).
Ahmed, S. S., Santosh, W., Kumar, S., and Christlet, H. T. T.: Metabolic
proﬁling of Parkinson’s disease: evidence of biomarker from gene expression
analysis and rapid neural network detection, J. Biomed. Sci., 16, 63 (2009).
Underwood, B. R., Broadhurst, D., Dunn, W. B., Ellis, D. I., Michell, A. W.,
Vacher, C., Mosedale, D. E., Kell, D. B., Barker, R. a., Grainger, D. J., and
Rubinsztein, D. C.: Huntington disease patients and transgenic mice have
similar pro-catabolic serum metabolite proﬁles, Brain, 129, 877e886 (2006).
Kaddurah-Daouk, R., McEvoy, J., Baillie, R. A., Lee, D., Yao, J. K.,
Doraiswamy, P. M., and Krishnan, K. R. R.: Metabolomic mapping of atypical
antipsychotic effects in schizophrenia, Mol. Psychiatry, 12, 934e945 (2007).

VOL. 115, 2013
107. Li, Z.-Y., Zheng, X.-Y., Gao, X.-X., Zhou, Y.-Z., Sun, H.-F., Zhang, L.-Z.,
Guo, X.-Q., Du, G.-H., and Qin, X.-M.: Study of plasma metabolic proﬁling and
biomarkers of chronic unpredictable mild stress rats based on gas chromatography/mass spectrometry, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 24,
3539e3546 (2010).
108. Trock, B. J.: Application of metabolomics to prostate cancer, Urol. Oncol., 29,
572e581 (2011).
109. Cevallos-Cevallos, J. M., Reyes-De-Corcuera, J., Etxeberria, E.,
Danyluk, M. D., and Rodrick, G. E.: Metabolomic analysis in food science:
a review, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 20, 557e566 (2009).
110. Shepherd, L. V., Fraser, P., and Stewart, D.: Metabolomics: a secondgeneration platform for crop and food analysis, Bioanalysis, 3, 1143e1159
(2011).
111. Tuorila, H. and Monteleone, E.: Sensory food science in the changing society:
opportunities, needs, and challenges, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 20, 54e62
(2009).
112. Acharjee, A., Kloosterman, B., de Vos, R. C. H., Werij, J. S., Bachem, C. W. B.,
Visser, R. G. F., and Maliepaard, C.: Data integration and network reconstruction with womics data using Random Forest regression in potato, Anal.
Chim. Acta, 705, 56e63 (2011).
113. Thissen, U., Coulier, L., Overkamp, K. M., Jetten, J., van der Werff, B. J. C.,
van de Ven, T., and van der Werf, M. J.: A proper metabolomics strategy
supports efﬁcient food quality improvement: a case study on tomato sensory
properties, Food Qual. Prefer., 22, 499e506 (2011).
114. Kim, J. K., Ha, S.-H., Park, S.-Y., Lee, S. M., Kim, H. J., Lim, S. H., Suh, S.-C.,
Kim, D. H., and Cho, H. S.: Determination of lipophilic compounds in
genetically modiﬁed rice using gas chromatography-time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometry, J. Food Compost. Anal., 25, 31e38 (2012).
115. Kende, A., Portwood, D., Senior, A., Earll, M., Bolygo, E., and Seymour, M.:
Target list building for volatile metabolite proﬁling of fruit, J. Chromatogr. A,
1217, 6718e6723 (2010).
116. Vaclavik, L., Lacina, O., Hajslova, J., and Zweigenbaum, J.: The use of high
performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry coupled to advanced data mining and chemometric tools for
discrimination and classiﬁcation of red wines according to their variety, Anal.
Chim. Acta, 685, 45e51 (2011).
117. Rodrigues, J. A., Barros, A. S., Carvalho, B., Brandao, T., and Gil, A. M.:
Probing beer aging chemistry by nuclear magnetic resonance and multivariate analysis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 702, 178e187 (2011).
118. Cynkar, W., Dambergs, R., Smith, P., and Cozzolino, D.: Classiﬁcation of
Tempranillo wines according to geographic origin: combination of mass
spectrometry based electronic nose and chemometrics, Anal. Chim. Acta, 660,
227e231 (2010).
119. Intelmann, D., Haseleu, G., Dunkel, A., Lagemann, A., Stephan, A., and
Hofmann, T.: Comprehensive sensomics analysis of hop-derived bitter
compounds during storage of beer, J. Agric. Food Chem., 59, 1939e1953
(2011).
120. Ikeda, T., A.-U.-A., M., Aziza Kawsar, P., Kanaya, S., Yonetani, T., and
Fukusaki, E.: Predicting rank of Japanese green teas by derivative proﬁles of
spectra obtained from fourier transform near-infrared reﬂectance spectroscopy, J. Comput. Aided Chem., 9, 37e46 (2008).
121. Tarachiwin, L., Ute, K., Kobayashi, A., and Fukusaki, E.: 1H NMR based
metabolic proﬁling in the evaluation of Japanese green tea quality, J. Agric.
Food Chem., 55, 9330e9336 (2007).

APPLICATION OF METABOLOMICS

589

122. Pongsuwan, W., Bamba, T., Yonetani, T., Kobayashi, A., and Fukusaki, E.:
Quality prediction of Japanese green tea using pyrolyzer coupled GC/MS
based metabolic ﬁngerprinting, J. Agric. Food Chem., 56, 744e750 (2008).
123. Pongsuwan, W., Bamba, T., Harada, K., Yonetani, T., Kobayashi, A., and
Fukusaki, E.: High-throughput technique for comprehensive analysis of
Japanese green tea quality assessment using ultra-performance liquid chromatography with time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry (UPLC/TOF MS), J. Agric.
Food Chem., 56, 10705e10708 (2008).
124. Tarachiwin, L., Katoh, A., Ute, K., and Fukusaki, E.: Quality evaluation of
Angelica acutiloba Kitagawa roots by 1H NMR-based metabolic ﬁngerprinting,
J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 48, 42e48 (2008).
125. Tianniam, S., Tarachiwin, L., Bamba, T., Kobayashi, A., and Fukusaki, E.:
Metabolic proﬁling of Angelica acutiloba roots utilizing gas chromatographytime-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry for quality assessment based on cultivation
area and cultivar via multivariate pattern recognition, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 105,
655e659 (2008).
126. Tianniam, S., Bamba, T., and Fukusaki, E.: Pyrolysis GC-MS-based metabolite
ﬁngerprinting for quality evaluation of commercial Angelica acutiloba roots,
J. Biosci. Bioeng., 109, 89e93 (2009).
127. Tianniam, S., Bamba, T., and Fukusaki, E.: Non-targeted metabolite ﬁngerprinting of oriental folk medicine Angelica acutiloba roots by ultra performance liquid chromatography time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry, J. Sep. Sci.,
32, 2233e2244 (2009).
128. Ciosek, P. and Wroblewski, W.: Sensor arrays for liquid sensing e electronic
tongue systems, Analyst, 132, 963e978 (2007).
129. Arrieta, A. A., Rodriguez-Mendez, M. L., de Saja, J. A., Blanco, C. A., and
Nimubona, D.: Prediction of bitterness and alcoholic strength in beer using an
electronic tongue, Food Chem., 123, 642e646 (2010).
130. Novakowski, W., Bertotti, M., and Paixao, T. R. L. C.: Use of copper and gold
electrodes as sensitive elements for fabrication of an electronic tongue:
discrimination of wines and whiskies, Microchem. J., 99, 145e151 (2011).
131. Toelstede, S. and Hofmann, T.: Sensomics mapping and identiﬁcation of the
key bitter metabolites in Gouda cheese, J. Agric. Food Chem., 56, 2795e2804
(2008).
132. He, W., Hu, X., Zhao, L., Liao, X., Zhang, Y., Zhang, M., and Wu, J.: Evaluation
of Chinese tea by the electronic tongue: correlation with sensory properties
and classiﬁcation according to geographical origin and grade level, Food Res.
Int., 42, 1462e1467 (2009).
133. Zhang, A., Sun, H., Wang, Z., Sun, W., Wang, P., and Wang, X.: Metabolomics: towards understanding traditional Chinese medicine, Planta Med.,
76, 2026e2035 (2010).
134. Molares, S. and Ladio, A.: Chemosensory perception and medicinal plants for
digestive ailments in a Mapuche community in NW Patagonia, Argentina,
J. Ethnopharmacol., 123, 397e406 (2009).
135. Pieroni, A. and Torry, B.: Does the taste matter? Taste and medicinal perceptions associated with ﬁve selected herbal drugs among three ethnic groups in
West Yorkshire, Northern England, J. Ethnobiol. Ethnomed., 3, 21 (2007).
136. Yokomi, N. and Ito, M.: Inﬂuence of composition upon the variety of tastes in
Cinnamomi Cortex, J. Nat. Med., 63, 261e266 (2009).
137. Mikage, M., Tanabe, M., Shinmura, H., and Sugaya, Y.: Evaluation of crude
drug by means of odor sensor, Nat. Med., 59, 63e69 (2005).
138. Katoh, A. and Ninomiya, Y.: Relationship between content of pharmacological
components and grade of Japanese Angelica radixes, J. Ethnopharmacol., 130,
35e42 (2010).

