C H A P T E R

18
Mass Spectrometry and NMR
SpectroscopyeBased Quantitative
Metabolomics
Danijel Djukovic, G.A. Nagana Gowda, Daniel Raftery
Mitochondria and Metabolism Center, Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University
of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

O U T L I N E
Metabolomics

279

Suppression of Macromolecular Signals
Quantitative Referencing
Spectral Simpliﬁcation Methods
Metabolite Quantitation Using
1D NMR
Metabolite Quantitation Using 2D NMR
Isotope-Labeled NMR
Ex Vivo Isotope Labeling

Comparative Chemometric Analysis versus
Quantitative Metabolomics
280
Mass Spectrometry
Liquid Chromatography Resolved MS
(LC-MS) Methods
Metabolite Quantitation Using LC-MS
Gas ChromatographyeResolved MS
(GC-MS) Methods

281

NMR Spectroscopy
Solvent Suppression

285
286

281
282
285

METABOLOMICS
Metabolomics (also known as metabonomics
or metabolic proﬁling) deals with the quantitative
analysis of multicomponent mixtures of biological samples and is focused on establishing

Proteomic and Metabolomic Approaches to Biomarker Discovery
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-394446-7.00018-2

286
288
289
289
290
291
291

Conclusions

293

References

293

metabolic responses of living systems to pathophysiological stimuli or genetic alterations.1,2
Although vast progress in the ﬁelds of genomics3
and proteomics4 has provided a wealth of information for understanding the factors that regulate cell physiology and pathology, great insight

279

Copyright Ó 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

280

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

into the functions of biological systems is also
gained through the study of concentrations and
ﬂuxes of metabolites. The quantitative measurement of small molecule metabolites that are the
end products of genes, transcripts, and proteins
provides vital information for understanding
the composition and function of biochemical
networks and promises solutions to many important questions related to human disease
diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutic development.5e9 Signiﬁcant interest in the application
of metabolomics-based approaches stems from
an ability to detect and quantitatively analyze
up to many hundreds of metabolites in parallel,
which provides an efﬁcient method for unraveling altered biochemistry.10,11 Because subtle
changes in gene expression or protein levels can
cause substantial changes in metabolite concentrations, analysis of metabolites represents
a very sensitive measure of biological status.
More important, metabolomicsdthrough the
ﬁngerprinting of biological variations of individualsdoffers avenues to achieve the goal of
“personalized medicine.”12
Numerous advanced analytical methods are
used for the analysis of complex mixtures of
biological samples including blood serum/
plasma, urine, cerebrospinal ﬂuid, bile, saliva,
seminal ﬂuid, amniotic ﬂuid, synovial ﬂuid, gut
aspirate, and cells and tissue.2 The two most
commonly used methods are mass spectrometry
(MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. Numerous methods within these
two major techniques provide both complementary and supplementary information on the identity and concentration of metabolites. MS is
highly sensitive and can detect more than a thousand metabolic features. Currently, methods that
use MS are almost always combined with separation techniques such as liquid chromatography
(LC) and gas chromatography (GC). Liquid chromatography enables separation of intact molecules; gas chromatography requires chemical
derivatization of biological mixtures, often with
silylating agents to make the metabolites volatile.

NMR spectroscopy, on the other hand, detects
relatively high concentration metabolites (typically >5 mM) and is highly reproducible and
quantitative. The latest technological advancements in NMRdincluding strong magnetic
ﬁelds, cryogenic probes and microcoils, and their
combination with isotope labelingdpromise
routine access to more than a hundred metabolites in biological mixtures.13
The data obtained from MS or NMR spectroscopy are complex and require analysis using
multivariate statistical methods. A large variety
of statistical methods are used currently for metabolomics applications, with the most frequently
used methods being principal component analysis
(PCA), logistic regression, and partial least
squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) and its
variants. PCA is an unsupervised method that is
often used as a starting point in the data analysis.14,15 Subsequently, predictive models are
often constructed using supervised methods.
PLS-DA is commonly used to build a model based
on the regression of data matrix X against matrix Y
that contains class information for each sample.16
Logistic regression, which is widely used in
biomedicine, is helpful for the selection of metabolites that contribute most to the classiﬁcation of
patients and controls. To avoid overﬁtting,
PLS-DA models are usually cross-validated, ﬁrst
internally using the same data set and later externally using independent data sets.

COMPARATIVE CHEMOMETRIC
ANALYSIS VERSUS
QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS
Metabolomics experiments fall into one of two
somewhat broad categories: One category uses
chemometric methods for comparative data
analysis and the other uses a quantitative
approach.17,18 In the traditional chemometric
approach, metabolites are not identiﬁed initially
from the spectral data. The complex data are
directly used for global multivariate statistical

281

MASS SPECTROMETRY

analysis after subjecting the data to preprocessing
steps such as baseline correction, peak alignment,
and solvent peak removal. Subsequently, metabolite features that distinguish sample classes are
identiﬁed and then the structures of distinguishing metabolic features are established.19 A major
drawback is that this approach often differentiates
sample classes based on a long list of minor metabolite features that make small contributions.
Possible solutions to this issue often involve
scaling the data or ﬁltering (feature selection, or
targeted analysis as discussed below) based on
a set of criteria such as univariate analysis.
Another challenge is that errors due to imperfect
spectral baselines and peak alignments and strong
uneven solvent backgrounds can cause signiﬁcant
problems for the analysis. Metabolite peaks from
both MS and NMR spectra are sensitive to sample
conditions. Positions of NMR signals, for example,
can be sensitive to subtle differences between
samples such as pH, ionic strength, temperature,
and concentration of macromolecules. Sensitivity
to these parameters is more pronounced for bioﬂuids such as urine.20,21 Spectral binning, in which
spectra are divided into several regions and the
data points within each region are integrated,
has been suggested to alleviate the deleterious
effects of small peak shifts.13,22,23 Nevertheless,
peak shifts combined with baseline distortions
can still translate into spectral bins that do not
represent true peak intensity and pose a signiﬁcant
challenge to the accuracy of the outcome. The
problem becomes more severe when the metabolite peaks involved are of low intensity.
Quantitative metabolomics, on the other
hand, follows a targeted approach wherein the
metabolites are ﬁrst identiﬁed and quantitated.24
The identities of metabolites are established
generally based on the available databases of
standard compounds; the identiﬁed metabolite
peaks are then quantiﬁed based on internal or
external reference compounds. The resulting
data can then be used as input variables for
statistical analysis using a variety of methods
as described previously for global chemometric

analysis. Because of the reliable peak identiﬁcation and measurement of metabolite integrals,
quantitative metabolomics can provide greater
insights into the dynamics and ﬂuxes of metabolites and promises robust statistical models for
distinguishing classes with better classiﬁcation
accuracy.

MASS SPECTROMETRY
Due to its high sensitivity (typically pg level)
and fast data acquisition speed, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the most commonly employed
analytical tools in metabolomics. Since early 2000,
there has been tremendous growth in MS-based
methods, including chromatography separation,
ionization,
and
detection
strategies.2,25,26
Advanced software combined with rich databases
have enabled automatic peak alignment, identiﬁcation, and quantitation of metabolites. Because
of the complexity of biological matrices, it is often
necessary to separate metabolites of interest prior
to MS acquisition, especially in case of metabolite
quantitation. Thus, hyphenated analytical platforms that combine chromatography with MS
have proved effective for metabolomics applications. Common separation techniques used
include liquid chromatography (LC), gas chromatography (GC), and capillary electrophoresis
(CE).27 Common MS techniques include quadrupole, triple-quadrupole, ion-trap, time-of-ﬂight
(TOF), and OrbitrapÔ mass analyzers, which
have been described in detail.28 LC- and
GC-based MS methods are particularly widespread, and the latest advances enable improved
quantitation by canceling errors arising from
sample complexity (i.e., matrix) effects.

Liquid Chromatography Resolved MS
(LC-MS) Methods
Among the MS methods, LC-MS is by far the
most widely used for metabolomics applications.29 It allows direct detection of metabolites

282

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

from biological samples with no requirement for
chemical modiﬁcation such as derivatization.
The latest LC-MS technological advances allow
absolute quantitation of more than 200 metabolites in rat plasma30 and relative quantitation of
more than 250 metabolic species in bodily ﬂuids,
cells, and tissue.31
LC-based MS methods commonly use “soft”
ionization techniques such as electrospray
ionization (ESI), as it ionizes a wide range of
metabolites without inducing metabolite fragmentation. Ion suppression is a major problem
associated with ESI, as it affects both the detection of metabolites as well as their reliable quantitation.32 Ion suppression, in which analytes do
not become efﬁciently ionized because of competition with other ionizable species, is caused by
numerous endogenous and exogenous factors
including the presence of salts, macromolecules,
or highly abundant interfering metabolites. The
addition of volatile buffers such as ammonium
acetate or ammonium formate in LC solvents
can help alleviate ion suppression due to the
salt effect. Ion suppression can also be reduced
by proper choice of sample preparation and LC
and MS parameters. Most biological samples
contain macromolecules such as proteins, which
need to be precipitated using organic solvents
such as methanol or acetonitrile. Further puriﬁcation by solid-phase extraction (SPE) can also
help reduce matrix effects. However, SPE is
more labor intensive and often requires
a recovery test for each metabolite. Therefore,
protein precipitation using an organic solvent
is typically a better choice for large-scale studies.
Another important step to alleviate ion suppression is optimization of chromatographic parameters for better peak resolution and minimization
of co-eluting metabolites. In order to improve the
separation, recently a number of researchers
used multiplexed LC methods on different
analytical columns. This approach allowed Wei
et al. to perform absolute quantitation of over
200 metabolites in biological samples.30 Regular
cleaning of the ion source and optimization of

the MS acquisition parameters are also critical
steps for minimizing ion suppression.

Metabolite Quantitation Using LC-MS
A number of LC-MS approaches have been
proposed to compensate for the effect of ion
suppression and provide reliable metabolite
quantitation. The most common approaches involve spiking biological specimens with stable
isotope (2H, 13C, or 15N)elabeled internal standards (SILISs) or structural analogues as internal
standards. Because these materials can often be
purchased commercially and can be obtained
in high purity, they can serve as relatively reliable standards. Quantitation utilizing SILISs
represents a very reliable approach, as such standards possess nearly identical chemical and
physical characteristics as the analyte of interest.
Each SILIS compound is eluted and ionized
nearly identically to its corresponding metabolite in the biological sample, and the increased
mass provides a peak offset by the mass difference between the two isotopic forms.
In practice, biological samples are spiked with
a standard solution of a single or multiple SILISs,
often prior to the sample preparation step to
compensate for any inaccuracies caused by
recovery loss.30,33 Accurate concentrations of
metabolites are then determined by directly
comparing peak areas of metabolites and their
isotope-labeled internal standard. The peak
area comparison, however, is reliable only if
the peak areas for both the metabolite and its
internal standard are similar, which is often not
the case for all metabolites. Some metabolites
vary in concentration or may have unknown
concentrations. In such cases, calibration curves
need to be obtained using mixtures of standard
compounds (calibrants) of different concentrations. All calibrant mixtures are spiked with SILISs at the same concentration as used in the
analysis of actual biological samples. The calibrants’ concentrations are chosen to cover the
whole linear dynamic range (LDR) for each

283

MASS SPECTROMETRY

target metabolite. A typical calibration curve is
shown in Figure 1.
Using this calibration curve, for example, the
actual concentration of the target metabolite in
a biological sample is determined by inverting
the equation for the ﬁtted calibration curve as:

Metabolite Concentration ¼

variation (CVs) of less than 15% for 80% or
more of the metabolites (Figure 2).30,34 Such
approaches assume that the chosen SILIS
compounds have similar ionization behavior to
the metabolites under investigation. Another
approach uses structural analogues as internal

½Park Area ðMetaboliteÞOPeak Area ðSILISÞ  0:0332
0:2474

where Peak Area (SILIS) is the peak area,
obtained from the multiple reaction mode detection, of the stable isotope-labeled internal standard spiked in the biological sample and 0.0332
and 0.2474 are the y-intercept and slope, respectively, as shown in Figure 1.
A major drawback of this approach is the
often prohibitively high cost of stable SILIS
compounds and/or commercial unavailability
of isotope-labeled standards for many metabolites. To circumvent this problem, many studies
have utilized a small set of representative SILIS
compounds and used them to analyze up to
200 or more metabolites with coefﬁcients of

(1)

standards that have similar structures and chemico/physical properties as the targeted metabolite class and are not a part of the endogenous
compounds. Tubercidin, for example, is thus
used as a structural analogue for the analysis of
nucleosides.35,36 Quantitation using such structural analogues is performed by spiking biological specimens with one or more structural
analogues as internal standards, and metabolite
concentrations are determined by comparison
of mass peak area with that of structural
analogue or by using a calibration curve similar
to that shown in Figure 1. CVs of 5% to 20% have
been obtained by this approach in the analysis of

Peak Area (Standard Metabolite) /
Peak Area (SILIS)

4.0
3.5
3.0

y = 0.2474x + 0.0332
R² = 0.9994

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.0

5.0
10.0
Standard Metabolite Concentration (µM)

15.0

FIGURE 1 Typical calibration curve obtained using solutions with different standard metabolite concentration and ﬁxed
internal standard (SILIS) concentration.

284

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

FIGURE 2 Distribution of CV values for metabolites in rat
plasma obtained using a small set of representative internal
standards (SILIS).30

modiﬁed nucleosides in biological samples.35,36
The use of structural analogues or a small
number of representative SILIS compounds can
be cost-effective in targeted metabolite quantitation. However, spiking with a SILIS for each
metabolite provides more reliable results (intraand interday CVs <10%), as only the labeled
counterpart can truly mimic the response of an
individual metabolite as compared to a structurally similar internal standard or representative
labeled metabolite.37,38
An approach that does not depend on
the commercially available isotope-labeled
compounds and eliminates a major drawback of
LC-MS-based metabolite quantiﬁcation utilizes
isotope-labeled metabolites produced in vivo.39,40
A mixture of hundreds of 13C-isotope-labeled
metabolites, for example, can be produced within
a few hours by feeding microorganisms such as
yeast or bacteria with U-13C-labeled medium.
This approach is signiﬁcantly less expensive and
enables access to isotope-labeled standards for
the majority of metabolites of interest in biological
samples. As with commercially available SILIS
compounds, metabolite quantitation is performed
by mixing biological specimens with in vivo
isotope-labeled mixture and comparing mass
peak intensities of each metabolite with its labeled
counterpart or using the calibration plots
(Figure 1). A one-time determination of metabolite

concentrations of isotope-labeled metabolites in
algal or bacterial extracts, however, is needed,
utilizing unlabeled standard mixtures of metabolites, and one needs to be careful about SILIS
sample stability. Nevertheless, using this in vivoe
derived SILIS compound approach, more than
90% of measured metabolites were shown to
exhibit CVs of less than 15%.33 This method has
fostered increased interest for determining absolute concentrations of cellular metabolites,18,40e45
and it will be interesting to see whether it
promises a robust method for mass spectrometryebased quantitative metabolomics using
commonly used biological samples such as blood,
urine, and tissue. Detailed step-by-step experimental protocols for quantitation of intracellular
metabolites and measurement of cellular ﬂuxes
have been described using examples of Escherichia
coli and primary human ﬁbroblasts fed with
U-13C-labeled carbon sources and labeled metabolite detection using LC-MS/MS.46,47
In the previously described quantitation
methods using a limited number of labeled
internal standards, external calibration curves
are usually used to calculate the metabolic
concentrations. These calibration curves are
obtained from calibrant samples that were spiked
with labeled internal standards. However, some
studies utilized external calibration curves
without spiking the calibrants with labeled
internal standards, and the metabolic concentrations were determined from a plot of the MS
peak intensity versus standard metabolite
concentration. The advantage of this approach is
that the calibrant samples do not require spiking
with labeled standards. The disadvantage of this
approach is that the calibration curves are based
on the series of standard dilutions with signiﬁcantly lower matrix effects than those exhibited
in the biological samples. Without the presence
of labeled internal standards to offset the ion
suppression effect, one risks underreporting the
actual metabolic concentrations. In addition,
the MS signal can drift over time due to the ﬂuctuations in the ionization efﬁciency, and as a result

285

NMR SPECTROSCOPY

the linearity of the predetermined calibration
curves can no longer be valid.

Gas ChromatographyeResolved MS
(GC-MS) Methods
GC-MS is a robust method for metabolomics
applications. It combines high separation efﬁciency and sensitive detection following electron
ionization.27,48 In particular, it is the preferred
method for the analysis of metabolites with low
molecular weight, as they can be quite effectively
analyzed with good sensitivity and reproducibility. Although the volatile, low-molecularweight metabolites can be directly analyzed,
nonvolatile, polar metabolites require chemical
derivatizationdoften silylationdbefore analysis.
There is a large literature on derivatization
methods in GC-MS.49 To improve resolution in
GC-MS, the development of two-column
approaches (2D GC-MS) offers further enhancement and is well suited for the analysis of
complex biological mixtures.50e52
The quantitative accuracy obtainable from
GC-MS critically depends on numerous factors
including sample collection, storage, extraction,
derivatization, stability, and analysis. By
comparison, instrumental stability reproducibility is much less problematic. In addition,
the ionization method of choicedelectron
ionizationdavoids complications such as ion
suppression. Factors that are of most concern
for GC-MS are the efﬁciency of derivatization
and the stability of derivatized metabolites.
Regarding the derivatization process, metabolites can be broadly grouped into three classes:
Class 1 metabolites, which contain hydroxyl or
carboxyl groups, exhibit the highest efﬁciency
towards derivatization and stability of the derivatized metabolite; Class 2 metabolites contain
amine or phosphoric groups and are very
sensitive to experimental conditions and are
measured with intermediate precision; and Class
3 compounds, with amide, thiol, or sulfonic functional groups, are more difﬁcult to derivatize and

analyze. To account for these differences, use of
representative
compounds
from
all
three groups as internal references has been
proposed.26
Nevertheless, with proper care regarding both
the sample processing and experimental conditions, precise results can be obtained to compare
relative metabolite concentrations. In general,
quantitative methods for GC-MS are less popular
than for LC-MS. External calibration methods are
sometimes used for quantitation; however,
literature-reported applications of SILIS to
GC-MS are quite limited. In contrast, in vivoe
labeling methods attract more attention. One
study reported the use of 13C-labeled yeast
cell extracts as a source for internal standards
to quantify intracellular metabolites in
S. cerevisiae cells. This study focused on measuring
nonoxidative pentose phosphate pathway intermediates using GC-MS.53 More recently, a simpliﬁed GC-MS method for absolute quantitation of
metabolites using commercially available
13
C-labeled algal extract for use as internal standards has been reported.54 13C isotope labeling
was also used to estimate metabolic ﬂuxes and
concentrations in mammalian (hepatic) cells using
a combination of GC-MS and LC-MS methods.45,55
Results of these studies promise more widespread
use of in vivoelabeled metabolites as internal standards for routine quantitative metabolomics
applications.

NMR SPECTROSCOPY
NMR spectroscopy is one of the most
information-rich techniques in the ﬁeld of metabolomics. It exhibits a number of important characteristics for both identiﬁcation and quantitative
analysis of metabolites in complex biological
samples. In particular, the high resolution and
superb reproducibility enable access to a large
number of metabolites and their accurate concentrations. Unlike MS, NMR allows structural veriﬁcation/identiﬁcation of both known and

286

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

unknown metabolites as well as quantitation,
from the same measurement. Because the same
nuclei, 1H for example, are detected with the
same sensitivity, a single internal standard is
sufﬁcient to determine the absolute concentrations of all detected metabolites in a single experiment. In addition, the ratios between peaks for
a speciﬁc metabolite are ﬁxed and depend on
the number of equivalent nuclei that contribute
to the peak and hence the integrated peak area
for any one isolated peak is sufﬁcient to determine a metabolite’s concentration.

Solvent Suppression
A critical requirement for quantiﬁcation by
NMR is the efﬁcient suppression of the water
signal. Owing to its high natural abundance,
sensitivity, and ubiquitous nature, 1H is the most
preferred nucleus for NMR-based metabolomics.
Bioﬂuids are aqueous in nature and the concentration of water in these samples is four orders of
magnitude or more higher than the typical concentrations of metabolites. To date, a large number of
water suppression methods exist, each with its
own advantages and disadvantages. Generally,
these methods use weak radio frequency (RF)
pulses, pulse ﬁeld gradients, or their combination
to suppress water signal.56e59 Numerous
improvements have been made that circumvent
many challenges associated with water suppression and provide spectra without distortions in
phase or peak intensity.60e65 A recently developed
water suppression pulse technique, WET180,
efﬁciently suppresses faraway water that experiences signiﬁcantly reduced RF ﬁelds relative to
bulk water within the RF coil redgion and enables
sensitive detection of metabolite signals (even
those very close to the water signal).66

Suppression of Macromolecular Signals
NMR spectra of bioﬂuids such as blood serum
and plasma obtained using the single pulse or
1D NOESY (nuclear Overhauser effect

spectroscopy) sequence are complicated due to
the overwhelming macromolecular signals
from lipids and proteins. It is very difﬁcult to
derive quantitative information on metabolites
from such spectra, although spectral ﬁtting approaches can provide limited solutions. Considering that blood is the most important medium
and is widely used in metabolomics applications, numerous developments have been made
to avoid the interference of macromolecular
signals. The spin-echo pulse sequence, speciﬁcally its improved version, the Carr-PurcellMieboom-Gill (CPMG) pulse sequence, which
exploits the large difference in the nuclear spin
relaxation properties between metabolites and
macromolecules, is often used to eliminate or
reduce macromolecular signals.2,67e73 Currently,
the CPMG pulse sequence is commonly used for
the analysis of blood serum and plasma samples.
However, caution should be exercised when
using this sequence for quantitative analysis
because the metabolite signals are attenuated
somewhat due to T2 relaxation. Further, many
physiologically important metabolites including
lactate, ketone bodies, and aromatic amino acids
such as tyrosine, phenylalanine, and histidine
bind to protein molecules in blood serum/
plasma. The 1H nuclei from such bound metabolites experience a substantial decrease in their
transverse relaxation (T2) times and make such
metabolites substantially invisible in the 1H
NMR spectra74,75; due to the line broadening
caused by such binding, some metabolite signals
can even altogether disappear from NMR
spectra. Thus, use of the CPMG sequence can
underestimate concentrations of all endogenous
and exogenous compounds that bind to
proteins.74,76
An altogether different approach that
completely separates metabolites and macromolecular signals in blood plasma is shown
in Figure 3.77 This approach utilizes diffusionsensitized 1H NMR spectroscopy and exploits
a large difference in the translational diffusion
coefﬁcients between blood plasma metabolites

287

NMR SPECTROSCOPY

(A)
Albumin
(lysyl)

Lipoproteins
(= CH)

Lipoproteins
(CH2)n
(CH3)

Glycoproteins
(N-acetyl)

(B)

× 1.2
Ace
[2-13C]-Ace

Lac
BHB

Glc
βH2
Glc

αH1
Glc

AcA
Crn

(C)
5.25

4.0

3.5

3.0

Cit

2.5

Val
Leu
Ile

Ac

Ala
2.0

1.5

1.0

PPM

FIGURE 3 (A) 1H NMR spectrum of blood plasma acquired with a low sensitivity toward diffusion (diffusion factor,
b ¼ 4.1 s/mm2), overlaid with a spectrum obtained with high diffusion sensitivity (diffusion factor, b ¼ 10,000 s/mm2, gray).
(B) 1H NMR spectrum of blood plasma acquired with a high sensitivity toward diffusion (diffusion factor, b ¼ 10,000 s/mm2).
The macromolecule spectra in (A) and (B) are identical. (C) Difference spectrum between (A) and (B). Abbreviations: acetate
(Ace), acetoacetate (AcA), aceton (Ac), alanine (Ala), b-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), citrate (Cit), creatinine (Crn), glucose (Glc),
isoleucine (Ile), lactate (Lac), leucine (Leu), and valine (Val). (Reproduced with permission from reference #77.)

288

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

and macromolecules to separate signals from the
two groups. Two separate NMR spectra are
obtained: one that is minimally affected by relaxation and diffusion and another in which all
metabolite signals are removed based on their
faster diffusion, which causes the NMR signal
to attenuate. Subtraction of the latter spectrum
from the ﬁrst provides a spectrum for blood
plasma metabolites, which is devoid of broad
peaks as well as baseline distortions from macromolecules. Another important method for
macromolecular signal suppression includes
physically removing proteins from the biological
mixtures. There are numerous ways for such
removal of proteins from blood plasma and
serum including precipitation by adding organic
solvents, salts, or altering pH, or by ultraﬁltration.78 The performance of such deproteinization
methods is shown to vary signiﬁcantly, and
hence caution should be exercised while optimizing the deproteinization protocol.79 Owing
to their superior performance, deproteinization
by ultracentrifugation using 3kDa cutoff ﬁlters,
for example,79,80 and precipitation using methanol solvent81 are more commonly used for
quantitative applications.

Quantitative Referencing
Adding a known amount of TSP [sodium
d4-3- (trimethylsilyl)-propionate] or DSS (sodium
d6-2, 2-dimethyl-2-silapentane-5-sulfonate) can
provide a signal that can be used as both a quantitative and chemical shift reference. However,
the binding of these standards with macromolecules such as proteins and their sensitivity to
sample conditions such as pH can lead to severe
signal attenuation or peak shifting; hence, addition of these compounds directly into biological
mixtures is generally not preferred. To circumvent this problem, formate was explored as
a quantitative reference, which reportedly does
not interact with macromolecules.82 Its utility
as a reference for quantitation is limited because
formate is present generally in most biological

mixtures. The use of a coaxial capillary tube containing a solution of TSP or DSS in deuterium
oxide (D2O) offers a number of advantages.
The reference compound does not interact with
the sample matrix; it serves as a chemical shift
as well as a quantitative reference, and the D2O
solvent serves as a ﬁeld-frequency locking
solvent. Further, the same capillary tube can be
used for all samples, which adds to minimizing
the quantitation errors. Nevertheless, this
approach adds some additional steps and is
hard to automate.
Somewhat recently, considering that water is
highly concentrated in biological mixtures,
a method that uses water itself as a concentration
reference was proposed.83 Here, the very large
solvent (water) signal is obtained in a separate
experiment with reduced receiver gain. The integral of the solvent signal is then compared with
those of metabolites using the two spectra to
obtain absolute concentrations of the metabolites
of interest. It was shown that quantitation of
metabolites can be made with errors less than
2% over a wide range of concentrations. This
method does not require additional compounds
for concentration referencing and is indifferent
to probe tuning. For accurate quantitation,
however, it assumes a linear response to radiofrequency pulse length and transmitter power,
and receiver gain settings, which is generally
true. Several following reports discuss the inﬂuence of such parameters on the accuracy of
metabolite quantitation.84e87 A method known
as ERETIC (Electronic REference To access In
vivo Concentrations) that does not require either
a reference compound or a solvent signal for
quantitation has also been proposed.88 It
involves synthesis of a reference signal by an
electronic device, and its position in the spectrum can be conveniently chosen so as to not
interfere with metabolite signals. For accurate
quantitation, however, the ERETIC method
requires occasional calibration using a standard
compound. Although this approach is very
simple, the results are reliable only when the

NMR SPECTROSCOPY

289

same sample load and probe tuning is maintained between samples.

promise for a number of quantitative metabolomics applications.

Spectral Simpliﬁcation Methods

Metabolite Quantitation Using 1D NMR

1

In a typical H NMR spectrum, signals are
observed between 0 ppm and 9 ppm, and most
are crowded into two spectral regions that
roughly span 5 ppm (0.84.4 ppm, 6.88.0
ppm). Because of the signal overlap, the identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of many metabolites of
interest often becomes impossible. This problem
is compounded because it is almost always the
case that a given bioﬂuid will contain a relatively
few species present at high concentrations that
will dominate the NMR spectra. Numerous
studies have been focused on alleviating this
challenge. One such approach uses selective total
correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY) methodology,
which can detect metabolites quantitatively even
if they are found at concentrations 10 to 100
times below those of the major components
and provides improved data inputs for principal
component analysis.89,90 Recently, quantitative
aspects were examined by optimizing the 1D
TOCSY experiment and comparing integrations
of 1D TOCSY read peaks to the bucket integration of 1D proton NMR spectra.91 An important
aspect of this approach is that selective TOCSY,
apart from metabolite quantitation, enables
unknown peak identiﬁcation in complex
ﬂuids.92 More recently, a new method called
Add to Subtract for efﬁcient suppression of background signals from highly concentrated metabolites in bioﬂuids such as strong glucose
background in serum and diabetic urine spectra
was shown.93 This method is simple to perform,
as it requires only obtaining a second spectrum
after the addition of a small drop of concentrated
glucose solution. It can reduce the glucose
signals by 98% and allow retrieval of the hidden
metabolic information. This spectral simpliﬁcation approach enables identiﬁcation of
distinguishing low concentrated metabolites
by multivariate statistical analysis and shows

Unambiguous peak identiﬁcation is a critical
step in quantitative metabolomics. To aid such
identiﬁcation, databases that contain NMR chemical shifts and spectra for several hundreds of
metabolites have been developed using standard
compounds that are publicly available.94,95 For
applications involving large sample sets, automation of metabolite identiﬁcation and quantitation
is often sought. Numerous method development
efforts have been focused on automated peak
identiﬁcation and/or metabolite quantitation.
Automated integration of deﬁned spectral
regions is the simplest approach for metabolite
quantitation. It reduces the number of variables
and, at the same time, provides integrals for the
reduced variables (metabolite signals). However,
this approach assumes that each variable
contains the same chemical information, which
is often not the case because many metabolitesd
for example, citrate, histidine, and taurined
exhibit signiﬁcant peak shifts due to altered pH
or ion concentrations. The severity of their peak
shifts is more prominent for bioﬂuids such as
urine.96,97 Moreover, baseline distortions deleteriously affect the quantitative measurement of
metabolites using this approach.98
A number of curve ﬁtting methods have been
proposed to focus on metabolite identiﬁcation
and quantitative analysis. A frequency domain
data ﬁtting approach was proposed to identify metabolite peaks from overlapped spectral
regions.99 It uses a semiautomated approach
and can therefore be time consuming for the
analysis of large sample sets. A different
approach, which is insensitive to the variation
of peak shifts because it makes use of prior
knowledge of the spectra of pure compounds,
was suggested.100 This method assumes that at
least one peak for the metabolite is isolated,
without overlap from other compounds, such

290

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

that it can be used as a reference. A major
improvement to peak identiﬁcation and accurate quantitative analysis of metabolites using
1D NMR spectra is provided by Chenomx
Inc.101,102 Metabolite identiﬁcation is facilitated
by modeling of the spectral features using
spectra of pure compounds from pH and spectrometer frequencyedependent chemical shift
databases. Accurate metabolite concentrations
are then obtained by comparing modeled
metabolite peak integrals with that of an
internal reference compound such as DSS. This
method allows identiﬁcation of peaks, even if
they are shifted due to altered conditions, such
as pH, and provides accurate concentration
values that can then be inputted for further
multivariate statistical analysis. The approach
is semiautomated and needs manual selection
of appropriate metabolites from the library
and manual feedback in the ﬁtting of peaks.
More recently, a method that performs automated spectral deconvolution of 1D NMR
spectra was presented.80 It uses an algorithm,
AutoFit, to reconstruct experimental spectra using
a reference compound library. The algorithm optimizes a number of parameters, including a recalibration of reference spectral library based on
position, intensity, and the peak line width from
a reference compound such as DSS, from the
experimental spectrum. An alternative approach,
based on a Bayesian ﬁtting algorithm, was
recently proposed.103 Although this approach is
currently limited to small spectral regions due to
its computational requirements, it operates in
a fully automated mode.

Metabolite Quantitation Using 2D NMR
In 1D 1H NMR, the relatively narrow spectral
region in which all metabolite signals are
observed results in peak overlap and limits the
number of metabolites that can be identiﬁed
and quantiﬁed accurately. This problem can be
greatly alleviated by making use of twodimensional (2D) NMR spectra, in which peaks

are spread along two dimensions to enable both
unambiguous identiﬁcation and accurate quantitation of an enhanced pool of metabolites.
Various 2D NMR methods that provide complementary information on metabolite identity
and metabolite concentrations are used. 2D
J-resolved spectroscopy, correlation spectroscopy (COSY), TOCSY, heteronuclear single
quantum-coherence
(HSQC)
spectroscopy,
and heteronuclear multiple-bond correlation
(HMQC) spectroscopy experiments are the
most commonly used. Projections of 2D
J-resolved spectra are much simpler as each
multiplet that arises due to spinespin couplings
(J-coupling) is collapsed to a single peak.104,105
However, care should be exercised in quantitating metabolites using this experiment since,
as for the 1D CPMG experiment, peak integrals
are affected by transverse relaxation during the
long evolution period. The 2D HSQC experiment is particularly attractive due to its much
higher resolving power, which arises from the
wider chemical shift ranges of heteronuclei
such as 13C and 15N. Lower sensitivity due to
the low gyromagnetic ratios of 13C and 15N,
combined with their low natural abundances
is, however, a major challenge that limits wider
utility of such 2D experiments. Nevertheless,
the latest advances in NMR instrumentation,
including the development of strong ﬁeld
magnets, cryogenic and microcoil probes, and
isotope labeling approaches, are contributing
to the increased utility of these experiments
for metabolomics applications.
A protocol for the determination of metabolite concentrations was evaluated using the
1
H-13C HSQC spectrum.106 Here, the 2D peak
integrals are compared with calibration curves
obtained from 2D spectra of three equimolar
mixtures of standard compounds to predict
the metabolite concentrations. Improving on
this quantitation strategy, an algorithm to
deconvolute 2D NMR peaks was developed.107
It constructs simple time domain models with
the fewest number of peaks, whose frequency

NMR SPECTROSCOPY

domain spectra match with target regions of the
experimental spectrum. Focusing on enhancing
the accuracy for the derived metabolite concentrations, three time-zero 1H-13C HSQC series
spectra with incremented repetition times were
used. From this series of spectra, an extrapolated time-zero HSQC spectrum (HSQC0) was
obtained.108,109 Peak intensities in the HSQC0
spectra represent true concentrations of individual metabolites, as they are not inﬂuenced
by delays during the pulse sequence that could
cause substantial loss of coherence due to relaxation. However, this method is somewhat time
consuming because of the need for multiple
2D spectrum acquisitions. A method that does
not require standard compounds for determining metabolite concentrations using 1H-13C
HSQC spectra was also reported.110 This
approach is based on applying a correction
factor to the 2D peak integrals, calculated
from the solution of the Bloch equations and
analysis of product operator formalism utilizing
longitudinal (T1) and transverse (T2) relaxation
parameters, 1H-13C heteronuclear J-coupling
and the delays used in the 2D pulse sequence.
Applying a correction factor eliminates the
effects of T1 and T2 relaxation, heteronuclear
couplings, and experimental parameters and
provides peak integrals that represent true metabolite concentrations.

Isotope-Labeled NMR
Another approach is the use of isotope
labeling using heteronuclei such as 13C and
15
N, which provides a number of beneﬁts for
quantitative metabolomics. Currently, isotope
labeling is used in two major applications. One
area focuses on tracing metabolic pathways
and ﬂux analysis using in vivo isotope labeling111e117 and the other on increasing the pool
of detected metabolites by enhancing resolution
and sensitivity using ex vivo labeling. Because
the ﬁrst area is not used primarily for quantitation, we focus on the second.

291

Ex Vivo Isotope Labeling
Owing to the extremely high complexity of
biological mixtures, only a small fraction of
metabolites can be accurately analyzed, and the
information derived from such a small number
of metabolite is insufﬁcient to gain insights into
altered cellular biochemistry. Targeting different
metabolite classes (acids, amines, etc.) using chemoselective isotope tags reduces molecular
complexity and improves the detection of lowconcentration metabolites by reducing the contribution of less interesting chemical signals. Stable
isotopes such as 13C and 15N and abundant heteronuclei such as 31P have been used to tag metabolites with speciﬁc functional groups and thereby
signiﬁcantly enhance the resolution and sensitivity of NMR experiments.118e122
Isotope labeling of metabolites using a 13C-acetylation tag results in selective labeling of
amine containing metabolites, and using the
1
H-13C HSQC experiment allows the detection of
the 13C-tagged metabolites with improved resolution and sensitivity.118 This labeling approach is
quantitative and the tagging reaction can be
carried out directly in aqueous solution at ambient
temperature. More recently, tagging using formylation using 13C-formic acid was shown to
improve the detection of amine containing metabolites.119 The large, 200 Hz, one-bond J-coupling
between the labeled 13C and 1H facilitates efﬁcient
transfer of polarization between the two nuclei in
HSQC experiments. Carboxyl functional group
containing metabolites represent another major
class of molecules in biological systems. They can
be chemically tagged with 15N-ethanolamine and
detected using a 2D 1H-15N HSQC experiment.120
The enhanced sensitivity and resolution from this
approach enables detection of metabolites at
concentrations as low as a few micromolar, quantitatively and reproducibly. Using this approach,
nearly 200 well-resolved signals corresponding
to well over 100 carboxyl-containing metabolites
can be routinely detected in biological mixtures.
A method to detect lipid metabolites with

292

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

FIGURE 4 Concentration of some
of the metabolites in the NIST plasma
obtained using 1D/2D NMR experiments with and without isotope
tagging: (A) obtained from 1H-15N
HSQC NMR after 15N tagging; (B)
obtained from 1H-13C HSQC NMR
after 13C tagging; (C) obtained from
1
H-1H TOCSY NMR of neat plasma;
and (D) obtained from 1D NMR of the
neat plasma sample. (Reproduced with
permission from reference #122.)

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

293

REFERENCES

hydroxyl, carboxyl, or aldehyde groups was
recently developed using a 31P isotope label.121 It
uses a 31P containing reagent, 2-chloro4,4,5,5-tetramethyldioxaphospholane (CTMDP),
to tag the lipid metabolites. Derivatized metabolites are then detected with enhanced resolution
using one-dimensional 31P NMR. The method
provides sufﬁcient sensitivity and spectral resolution, and derivatized species have unique and
well-resolved resonances in the 31P NMR
spectrum.
A single peak, devoid of multiplicity, for each
tagged metabolite and effective ﬁltering of nontagged metabolites signiﬁcantly add to the
sensitivity and background suppression. Identiﬁcation of tagged metabolites requires the
knowledge of chemical shifts of isotope-tagged
standard compounds. In view of this, a chemical
shift library for nearly 150 isotope-tagged metabolites is developed and using this library, more
than 50 metabolites in human serum and urine
have been identiﬁed.119e121 More recently, using
a combination of NMR methodsdincluding
isotope taggingdmetabolites in human plasma
from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) (Gaithersburg, MD) were
quantiﬁed.122 1H-15N HSQC and 1H-13C HSQC
experiments on the isotope-tagged samples
combined with the conventional 1H onedimensional and 1H-1H TOCSY experiments
provide quantitative information on a large
number of metabolites in plasma (Figure 4).
The methods were ﬁrst tested on a mixture of
synthetic analogues of metabolites commonly
present in human blood and then metabolites
in a standard NIST plasma were identiﬁed and
quantiﬁed with an average coefﬁcient of variation of less than 5.6%.

approach is to use SILISs to minimize ion
suppression effects. This technique is capable
of performing metabolic measurements with
intra- and interday CVs in the single digit
range. Another, less accurate approach, is to
use structural analogues as internal standards,
and ﬁnally the use of external calibration
curves is cost effective, relatively straightforward, and gaining popularity in the metabolomics ﬁeld. NMR spectroscopy, with its ability
to provide both the identities and accurate
concentrations of a large number of metabolites
using a single internal reference, represents an
important method for quantitative metabolomics. NMR’s ability to proﬁle metabolites in
intact biological samples, including cells and
tissue, is unique and offers important avenues
to identify and quantify new metabolites, as
well as to translate the ﬁndings of biomarker
discovery research to in vivo clinical applications. New methods that provide enhanced
resolution and better sensitivity for both
NMR and MS platforms will continue to propel
quantitative metabolomics.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

CONCLUSIONS
Quantitative metabolomics has progressed
quickly on a number of fronts. For mass spectrometry, the most accurate and quantitative

6.
7.

Nicholson JK, Lindon JC, Holmes E, et al. Metabonomics: understanding the metabolic responses of
living systems to pathophysiological stimuli via
multivariate statistical analysis of biological NMR
spectroscopic data. Xenobiotica 1999;29:1181e9.
Nagana Gowda GA, Zhang S, Gu H, et al. Metabolomics-based methods for early disease diagnostics:
a review. Exp Rev Mol Diagn 2008;8:617e33.
Brown PO, Botstein D. Exploring the new world of the
genome with DNA microarrays. Nat Genetics 1999;21:
33e7.
Patterson SD, Aebersold RH, et al. Proteomics: the
ﬁrst decade and beyond. Nat Genetics 2003;33:
311e23.
Fiehn O. Metabolomicsdthe link between genotypes
and phenotypes. Plant Mol Biol 2002;48:155e71.
Fell DA. Enzymes, metabolites and ﬂuxes. J Exp Bot
2005;56:267e72.
Saghatelian A, Cravatt BF. Global strategies to integrate the proteome and metabolome. Curr Opin Chem
Biol 2005;9:62e8.

294
8.

9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

14.

15.

16.
17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

Assfalg M, Bertini I, Colangiuli D, et al. Evidence of
different metabolic phenotypes in humans. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008;105:1420e4.
Nicholson JK, Lindon JC. Systems biology: metabonomics. Nature 2008;455:1054e6.
Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, et al. HMDB: a knowledge base for the human metabolome. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009;37:D603e10.
Psychogios N, Hau DD, Peng J, et al. The human
serum metabolome. PLoS One 2011;6:e16957.
Holmes E, Wilson ID, Nicholson JK, et al. Metabolic
phenotyping in health and disease. Cell 2008;134:714e7.
Ye T, Zhang S, Nagana Gowda GA, et al. Nuclear
magnetic resonance and statistical analysis. In:
Meyers RA, editor. Encyclopedia of Anal. Chem. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley; 2010.
Holmes E, Antti H. Chemometric contributions to
the evolution of metabonomics: mathematical
solutions to characterising and interpreting complex
biological NMR spectra. Analyst 2002;127:1549e57.
Grifﬁn JL. Metabolic proﬁles to deﬁne the genome: can
we hear the phenotypes? Philos Trans Royal Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 2004;359:857e71.
Barker M, Rayens W. Partial least squares for
discrimination. J Chemom 2003;17:166e73.
Wishart DS. Quantitative metabolomics using NMR.
Trends Anal Chem 2008;27:228e37.
Büscher JM, Czernik D, Ewald JC, et al. Cross-platform comparison of methods for quantitative metabolomics of primary metabolism. Anal Chem 2009;81:
2135e43.
Grifﬁn JL. Metabonomics: NMR spectroscopy and
pattern recognition analysis of body ﬂuids and tissues
for characterisation of xenobiotic toxicity and disease
diagnosis. Curr Opin Chem Biol 2003;7:648e54.
Lauridsen M, Hansen SH, Jaroszewski JW, et al.
Human urine as test material in 1H NMR-based
metabonomics: recommendations for sample preparation and storage. Anal Chem 2007;79:1181e6.
Asiago V, Nagana Gowda GA, Zhang S, et al. Use of
EDTA to minimize ionic strength and pH dependent
frequency shifts in the 1H NMR spectra of urine.
Metabolomics 2008;3:328e36.
Gartland KP, Beddell CR, Lindon JC, et al. Application
of pattern recognition methods to the analysis and
classiﬁcation of toxicological data derived from proton
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of urine. Mol
Pharmacol 1991;39:629e42.
Anthony ML, Sweatman BC, Beddell CR, et al. Pattern
recognition classiﬁcation of the site of nephrotoxicity
based on metabolic data derived from proton nuclear
magnetic resonance spectra of urine. Mol Pharmacol
1994;46:199e211.

24. Lanza IR, Zhang S, Ward LE, et al. Quantitative
metabolomics by H-NMR and LC-MS/MS conﬁrms
altered metabolic pathways in diabetes. PLoS One
2010;5:e10538.
25. Lu W, Bennett BD, Rabinowitz JD, et al. Analytical
strategies for LC-MS-based targeted metabolomics. J
Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2008;871:
236e42.
26. Koek MM, Jellema RH, van der Greef J, et al. Quantitative metabolomics based on gas chromatography
mass spectrometry: status and perspectives. Metabolomics 2011;7:307e28.
27. Skoog DA, Holler FJ, Crouch SR, et al. Principles of
Instrumental Analysis. 6th ed. Salt Lake City, UT:
Brooks Cole Publishing Co; 2006.
28. Boyd RK, Basic C, Bethem RA, et al. Trace Quantitative
Analysis by Mass Spectrometry. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley; 2008.
29. Wilson ID, Plumb R, Granger J, et al. HPLC-MS-based
methods for the study of metabolomics. J Chromatog B
2005;817:67e76.
30. Wei R, Li G, Seymour AB, et al. High-throughput and
multiplexed LC/MS/MRM method for targeted
metabolomics. Anal Chem 2010;82:5527e33.
31. Yuan M, Breitkopf SB, Yang X, et al. A positive/negative ioneswitching, targeted mass spectrometryebased
metabolomics platform for bodily ﬂuids, cells, and fresh
and ﬁxed tissue. Nat Protoc 2012;7:872e81.
32. Annesley TM. Ion suppression in mass spectrometry.
Clin Chem 2003;49:1041e4.
33. Bajad SU, Lu W, Kimball EH, et al. Separation and
quantitation of water soluble cellular metabolites by
hydrophilic interaction chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 2006;1125:76e88.
34. Janeckova H, Hron K, Wojtowicz P, et al. Targeted
metabolomic analysis of plasma samples for the
diagnosis of inherited metabolic disorders. J Chromatogr A 2012;1226:11e7.
35. Djukovic D, Baniasadi HR, Ravi KC, et al. Targeted
serum metabolite proﬁling of nucleosides in esophageal adenocarcinoma. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom
2010;24:3057e62.
36. Cho SH, Choi MH, Lee WY, et al. Evaluation of
urinary nucleosides in breast cancer patients before
and after tumor removal. Clin Biochem 2009;42:540e3.
37. Koc H, Mar MH, Ranasinghe A, et al. Quantitation of
choline and its metabolites in tissue and foods by
liquid
chromatography/electrospray
ionizationisotope dilution mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 2002;
74:4734e40.
38. Nagy K, Takats Z, Pollreisz F, et al. Direct tandem
mass spectrometric analysis of amino acids in dried
blood spots without chemical derivatization for

REFERENCES

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

neonatal screening. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom
2003;17:983e90.
Birkemeyer C, Luedemann A, Wagner C, et al.
Metabolome analysis: the potential of in vivo labeling
with stable isotopes for metabolite proﬁling. Trends
Biotechnol 2005;23:28e33.
Mashego MR, Wu L, van Dam JC, et al. MIRACLE:
mass isotopomer ratio analysis of U-13C-labeled
extracts: a new method for accurate quantiﬁcation of
changes in concentrations of intracellular metabolites.
Biotechnol Bioeng 2004;85:620e8.
Wu L, Mashego MR, van Dam JC, et al. Quantitative
analysis of the microbial metabolome by isotope dilution mass spectrometry using uniformly 13C-labeled
cell extracts as internal standards. Anal Biochem 2005;
336:164e71.
Seifar RM, Zhao Z, van Dam J, et al. Quantitative
analysis of metabolites in complex biological samples
using ion-pair reversed-phase liquid chromatographyisotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 2008;1187:103e10.
Bennett BD, Kimball EH, Gao M, et al. Absolute
metabolite concentrations and implied enzyme active
site occupancy in Escherichia coli. Nat Chem Biol 2009;
5:593e9.
Luo B, Groenke K, Takors R, et al. Simultaneous
determination of multiple intracellular metabolites
in glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway and tricarboxylic acid cycle by liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 2007;1147:153e64.
Hofmann U, Maier K, Niebel A, et al. Identiﬁcation of
metabolic ﬂuxes in hepatic cells from transient
13
C-labeling experiments: Part I. Experimental observations. Biotechnol Bioeng 2008;100:344e54.
Bennett BD, Yuan J, Kimball EH, et al. Absolute
quantitation of intracellular metabolite concentrations
by an isotope ratio-based approach. Nat Protoc 2008;3:
1299e311.
Yuan J, Bennett BD, Rabinowitz JD, et al. Kinetic ﬂux
proﬁling for quantitation of cellular metabolic ﬂuxes.
Nat Protoc 2008;3:1328e40.
Villas-Boas SG, Delicado DG, et al. Simultaneous analysis of amino and non-amino organic acids as methyl
chloroformate derivatives using gas chromatographymass spectrometry. Anal Biochem 2003;322:134e8.
Sparkman OD, Penton Z, Kitson FG, et al. Gas Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry: A Practical Guide.
2nd ed. Burlington, MA: Academic Press; 2011.
Mohler RE, Dombek KM, Hoggard JC, et al.
Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry analysis of
metabolites in fermenting and respiring yeast cells.
Anal Chem 2006;78:2700e9.

295

51. Asiago VM, Alvarado LZ, Shanaiah N, et al. Early
detection of recurrent breast cancer using metabolite
proﬁling. Cancer Res 2010;70:8309e18.
52. Mondello L, Tranchida PQ, Dugo P, et al. Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography-mass spectrometry: a review. Mass Spectrom Rev 2008;27:101e24.
53. Cipollina C, ten Pierick A, Canelas AB, et al. A
comprehensive method for the quantiﬁcation of the
non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway intermediates in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by GC-IDMS. J
Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2009;877:
3231e6.
54. Vielhauer O, Zakhartsev M, Horn T, et al.
Simpliﬁed absolute metabolite quantiﬁcation by gas
chromatography-isotope dilution mass spectrometry
on the basis of commercially available source material.
J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2011;879:
3859e70.
55. Maier K, Hofmann U, Reuss M, et al. Identiﬁcation of
metabolic ﬂuxes in hepatic cells from transient
13
C-labeling experiments: Part II. Flux estimation.
Biotechnol Bioeng 2008;100:355e70.
56. Piotto M, Saudek S, Sklenar V. Gradient-tailored
excitation for single-quantum NMR spectroscopy of
aqueous solutions. J Biomol NMR 1992;2:661e5.
57. Sklenar V, Piotto M, Leppik R, et al. Gradient-tailored
water suppression for 1He15N HSQC experiments
optimized to retain full sensitivity. J Magn Reson A
1993;102:241e5.
58. Hoult DI. Solvent peak saturation with single phase
and quadrature Fourier transformation. J Magn Reson
1976;21:337e47.
59. Ogg RJ, Kingsley PB, Taylor JS. WET, a T1- and B1insensitive water-suppression method for in vivo
localized 1H NMR spectroscopy. J Magn Reson B 1994;
104:1e10.
60. Neuhaus D, Ismail IM, Chung CW. “FLIPSY”da new
solvent-suppression sequence for nonexchanging
solutes offering improved integral accuracy relative to
1D NOESY. J Magn Reson A 1996;118:256e63.
61. Simpson AJ, Brown SA, Purge NMR: effective and easy
solvent suppression. J Magn Reson 2005;175:340e6.
62. Mo H, Raftery D. Pre-SAT180, a simple and effective
method for residual water suppression. J Magn Reson
2008;190:1e6.
63. Hwang TL, Shaka AJ. Water suppression that works:
excitation sculpting using arbitrary wave forms and
pulsed ﬁeld gradients. J Magn Reson A 1995;112:275e9.
64. Mescher M, Tannus A, Johnson MO, Garwood M.
Solvent suppression using selective echo dephasing. J
Magn Reson A 1996;123:226e9.
65. Nguyen BD, Meng X, Donovan KJ, et al. SOGGY:
solvent-optimized double gradient spectroscopy for

296

66.
67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.
75.

76.

77.

78.
79.

80.

81.

18. MASS SPECTROMETRY AND NMR SPECTROSCOPYeBASED QUANTITATIVE METABOLOMICS

water suppression. A comparison with some existing
techniques. J Magn Reson 2007;184:263e74.
Mo H, Raftery D. Improved residual water suppression: WET180. J Biomol NMR 2008;41:105e11.
Carr HY, Purcell EM. Effects of diffusion on free
precession in nuclear magnetic resonance experiments. Phys Rev 1954;94:630e8.
Meiboom S, Gill D. Modiﬁed spin-echo method for
measuring nuclear relaxation times. Rev Sci Instrum
1958;29:688e91.
Nicholson JK, Wilson ID. High resolution proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy of biological ﬂuids.
Prog Nucl Magn Reson Spectrosc 1989;21:449e501.
Nicholson JK, Buckingham MJ, Sadler PJ. High resolution 1H n.m.r. studies of vertebrate blood and
plasma. Biochem J 1983;211:605e15.
Nicholson JK, Flynn MP, Sadler PJ, et al. Protonnuclear-magnetic resonance studies of serum, plasma
and urine from fasting normal and diabetic subjects.
Biochem J 1984;217:365e75.
Iles RA, Buckingham MJ, Hawkes GE. Spin-echo
proton nuclear magnetic resonance studies of normal
and abnormal metabolites in plasma and urine.
Biochem Soc Trans 1983;11:374e5.
Rabenstein DL, Millis KK, Strauss EJ. Proton NMR
spectroscopy of human blood plasma and red blood
cells. Anal Chem 1988;60:1380Ae91A.
Bell JD, Brown JC, Kubal G, Sadler PJ. NMR-invisible
lactate in blood plasma. FEBS Lett 1988;235:81e6.
Nicholson JK, Gartland KP. 1H NMR studies on
protein binding of histidine, tyrosine and phenylalanine in blood plasma. NMR Biomed 1989;2:77e82.
Wevers RA, Engelke U, Heerschap A. High-resolution
1
H-NMR spectroscopy of blood plasma for metabolic
studies. Clin Chem 1994;40(7 Pt 1):1245e50.
de Graaf RA, Behar KL. Quantitative 1H NMR spectroscopy of blood plasma metabolites. Anal Chem 2003;
75(9):2100e4.
Voet D, Voet JG. Biochemistry. New York, NY: Wiley;
1990.
Daykin CA, Foxall PJ, Connor SC, et al. The comparison of plasma deproteinization methods for the
detection of low-molecular-weight metabolites by
(1)H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Anal
Biochem 2002;304(2):220e30.
Mercier P, Lewis MJ, Chang D, et al. Towards automatic metabolomic proﬁling of high-resolution onedimensional proton NMR spectra. J Biomol NMR 2011;
49(3e4):307e23.
Want EJ, O’Maille G, Smith CA, et al. Solventdependent metabolite distribution, clustering, and
protein extraction for serum proﬁling with mass
spectrometry. Anal Chem 2006;78(3):743e52.

82. Kriat M, Confort-Gouny S, Vion-Dury J, et al. Quantitation of metabolites in human blood serum by
proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy: a comparative study of the use of formate and TSP as concentration standards. NMR Biomed 1992;5(4):179e84.
83. Mo H, Raftery D. Solvent signal as an NMR concentration reference. Anal Chem 2008;80:9835e9.
84. Mo H, Harwood J, Raftery D. NMR quantitation:
inﬂuence of RF inhomogeneity. Magn Reson Chem
2011;49(10):655e8.
85. Mo H, Harwood JS, Raftery D. A quick diagnostic test
for NMR receiver gain compression. Magn Reson Chem
2010;48(10):782e6.
86. Mo H, Harwood JS, Raftery D. Receiver gain function:
the actual NMR receiver gain. Magn Reson Chem 2010;
48(3):235e8.
87. Mo H, Harwood J, Zhang S, et al. R: A quantitative
measure of NMR signal receiving efﬁciency. J Magn
Reson 2009;200(2):239e44.
88. Akoka S, Barantin L, Trierweiler M. Concentration
measurement by proton NMR using the ERETIC
method. Anal Chem 1999;71(13):2554e7.
89. Sandusky P, Raftery D. Use of semiselective TOCSY
and the Pearson correlation for the metabonomic
analysis of bioﬂuid mixtures: application to urine.
Anal Chem 2005;77(23):7717e23.
90. Sandusky P, Raftery D. Use of selective TOCSY NMR
experiments for quantifying minor components in
complex mixtures: application to the metabonomics of
amino acids in honey. Anal Chem 2005;77(8):2455e63.
91. Sandusky P, Appiah-Amponsah E, Raftery D. Use of
optimized 1D TOCSY NMR for improved quantitation
and metabolomic analysis of bioﬂuids. J Biomol NMR
2011;49(3-4):281e90.
92. Appiah-Amponsah E, Shanaiah N, Nagana Gowda GA,
et al. Identiﬁcation of 4-deoxythreonic acid present
in human urine using HPLC and NMR techniques.
J Pharm Biomed Anal 2009;50(5):878e85.
93. Ye T, Zheng C, Zhang S, et al. “Add to subtract”:
a simple method to remove complex background
signals from the 1H nuclear magnetic resonance
spectra of mixtures. Anal Chem 2012;84(2):994e1002.
94. Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, et al. HMDB: a knowledge base for the human metabolome. Nucleic Acids
Res 2009;(Database Issue):D603e10.
95. Markley JL, Anderson ME, Cui Q, et al. New bioinformatics resources for metabolomics. Pac Symp
Biocomput; 2007;157e68.
96. Holmes E, Nicholson JK, Nicholls AW, et al. The
identiﬁcation of novel biomarkers of renal toxicity
using automatic data reduction techniques and PCA
of proton NMR spectra of urine. Chemom Intell Lab Syst
1998;44:245e55.

REFERENCES

97. Asiago V, Nagana Gowda GA, Zhang S, et al. Use of
EDTA to minimize ionic strength and pH dependent
frequency shifts in the 1H NMR spectra of urine.
Metabolomics 2008;3:328e36.
98. Potts BC, Deese AJ, Stevens GJ, et al. NMR of bioﬂuids
and pattern recognition: assessing the impact of NMR
parameters on the principal component analysis of
urine from rat and mouse. J Pharm Biomed Anal 2001;
26(3):463e76.
99. Mierisová S, Ala-Korpela M. MR spectroscopy quantitation: a review of frequency domain methods. NMR
Biomed 2001;14(4):247e59.
100. Crockford DJ, Keun HC, Smith LM, et al. Curve-ﬁtting
method for direct quantitation of compounds in
complex biological mixtures using 1H NMR: application in metabonomic toxicology studies. Anal Chem
2005;77(14):4556e62.
101. Weljie AM, Newton J, Mercier P, et al. Targeted
proﬁling: quantitative analysis of 1H NMR metabolomics data. Anal Chem 2006;78(13):4430e42.
102. NMR Suite Chenomx. Edmonton, AB, Canada: Chenomx Inc., http://www.chenomx.com; 2010.
103. Zheng C, Zhang S, Ragg S, et al. Identiﬁcation and
quantiﬁcation of metabolites in (1)H NMR spectra by
Bayesian model selection. Bioinformatics 2011;27(12):
1637e44.
104. Parsons HM, Ludwig C, Gunther UL, et al. Improved
classiﬁcation accuracy in 1- and 2-dimensional NMR
metabolomics data using the variance stabilising
generalised logarithm transformation. BMC Bioinform
2007;8:234.
105. Ludwig C, Viant MR. Two-dimensional J-resolved
NMR spectroscopy: review of a key methodology in
the metabolomics toolbox. Phytochem Analysis 2010;
21(1):22e32.
106. Lewis IA, Schommer SC, Hodis B, et al. Method for
determining molar concentrations of metabolites in
complex solutions from two-dimensional 1H-13C NMR
spectra. Anal Chem 2007;79(24):9385e90.
107. Chylla RA, Hu K, Ellinger JJ, et al. Deconvolution of two-dimensional NMR spectra by fast maximum
likelihood reconstruction: application to quantitative
metabolomics. Anal Chem 2011;83(12):4871e80.
108. Hu K, Westler WM, Markley JL. Simultaneous quantiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of individual chemicals in
metabolite mixtures by two-dimensional extrapolated
time-zero 1H-13C HSQC (HSQC0). J Am Chem Soc 2011;
133:1662e5.
109. Hu K, Ellinger JJ, Chylla RA, et al. Measurement of
absolute concentrations of individual compounds in
metabolite mixtures by gradient-selective time-zero
1
H-13C HSQC with two concentration references and

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.

121.

122.

297
fast maximum likelihood reconstruction analysis. Anal
Chem 2011;83(24):9352e60.
Rai RK, Tripathi P, Sinha N. Quantiﬁcation of
metabolites from two-dimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy: application to human urine
samples. Anal Chem 2009;81(24):10232e8.
Fan TW, Lane AN. NMR-based stable isotope
resolved metabolomics in systems biochemistry.
J Biomol NMR 2011;49:267e80.
Wise DR, DeBerardinis RJ, Mancuso A, et al. Myc
regulates a transcriptional program that stimulates
mitochondrial glutaminolysis and leads to glutamine
addiction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2008;105:18782e7.
Fan TW, Lane AN, Higashi RM, et al. Stable isotope
resolved metabolomics of lung cancer in a SCID
mouse model. Metabolomics 2011;7:257e69.
Fan TW, Lane AN, Higashi RM, et al. Altered regulation of metabolic pathways in human lung cancer
discerned by (13)C stable isotope-resolved metabolomics (SIRM). Mol Cancer 2009;8:41.
Locasale JW, Grassian AR, Melman T, et al. Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase diverts glycolytic ﬂux
and contributes to oncogenesis. Nat Genet 2011;43:
869e74.
Burgess SC, Babcock EE, Jeffrey FM, et al. NMR
indirect detection of glutamate to measure citric acid
cycle ﬂux in the isolated perfused mouse heart. FEBS
Lett 2001;505:163e7.
Perdigoto R, Furtado AL, Porto A, et al. Sources of
glucose production in cirrhosis by 2H2O ingestion and
2
H NMR analysis of plasma glucose. Biochim Biophys
Acta 2003;1637:156e63.
Shanaiah N, Desilva A, Nagana Gowda GA, et al.
Metabolite class selection of amino acids in bioﬂuids
using chemical derivatization and their enhanced 13C
NMR. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2007;104:11540e4.
Ye T, Zhang S, Mo H, et al. 13C-formylation for
improved NMR proﬁling of amino metabolites in
bioﬂuids. Anal Chem 2010;82:2303e9.
Ye T, Mo H, Shanaiah N, et al. Chemoselective 15N tag
for sensitive and high-resolution nuclear magnetic
resonance proﬁling of the carboxyl-containing
metabolome. Anal Chem 2009;81:4882e8.
DeSilva MA, Shanaiah N, Nagana Gowda GA, et al.
Application of 31P NMR spectroscopy and chemical
derivatization for metabolite proﬁling of lipophilic
compounds in human serum. Magn Reson Chem 2009;
47:S74e80.
Nagana Gowda GA, Tayyari F, Ye T, et al. Quantitative analysis of blood plasma metabolites using
isotope enhanced NMR methods. Anal Chem 2010;82:
8983e90.

