Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Fast sampling for quantitative microbial metabolomics
Walter M van Gulik
Targeted metabolomics, aimed at the study of metabolic
reaction networks and their regulation in vivo, is a rapidly
emerging field in systems biology. Obtaining proper
quantitative snapshots of the microbial metabolome requires
fast sampling, immediate quenching of enzymatic activity,
separation of exometabolome and endometabolome,
complete metabolite extraction from the cells, and reliable
high-throughput analysis methods. This review addresses the
current state of the art of rapid sampling and quenching for
microbial metabolomics. Several robust and reliable rapid
sampling devices have been developed. Various quenching
and separation procedures have been proposed and applied,
but with respect to the reliability of the different methods the
literature is contradictory. To date a reliable universal method
applicable to different microbial species is still lacking.
Address
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology,
Julianalaan 67, 2628BC Delft, The Netherlands
Corresponding author: van Gulik, Walter M (w.m.vangulik@tudelft.nl)

Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34
This review comes from a themed issue on
Analytical biotechnology
Edited by Peter Neubauer and Andreas Schmid
Available online 10th February 2010
0958-1669/$ – see front matter
# 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI 10.1016/j.copbio.2010.01.008

Introduction
To obtain a quantitative systems biology understanding
of cellular metabolism and its regulation, measurements
on all different hierarchical levels, for example genome,
transcriptome, proteome, fluxome, and metabolome are
required [1]. At present whole genome sequencing and
measurement of genome-wide expression levels have
become common practice. Also methods for the quantification of intracellular fluxes, either through metabolite
balancing or based on stable isotope (e.g. 13C) labeling,
have been well established [2]. Although significant progress has been made in proteomics [3] and metabolomics
[4], especially because of the advancement of MS-based
analytical procedures, these are still far from being established routine techniques. A prerequisite for obtaining
meaningful metabolome data is the application of proper
sampling and sample processing procedures. Many
metabolites, especially the intermediates of the central
www.sciencedirect.com

metabolic pathways and connected cofactors like ATP
and NADH, have turnover times in the order of seconds,
as can be calculated from their in vivo pool sizes and
conversion rates. It should be realized that to obtain a
proper snapshot of the intracellular metabolite levels,
sampling, and subsequent arrest of metabolic activity
should be fast, that is, significantly faster than the turnover time of the metabolite pools. In this review the
current state of the art of rapid sampling and quenching
for quantitative microbial metabolomics is addressed
whereby the reliability of the published procedures is
critically investigated.

Fast sampling from bioreactors
Sampling devices

In the past several manually operated devices for rapid
sampling from bioreactors have been developed [5,6,7].
Main disadvantages of these systems were that the operation is relatively laborious, and that the variation in
sample volume highly depends on the skills of the
operator. This led to the construction of sampling systems
with electrically operated valves controlled by a timer
[8,9]. Disadvantage of these systems is that they do not
allow increasing the sampling frequency much above one
sample per five seconds, because of the many manual
handlings that have to be performed. Therefore Schaefer
et al. [10] developed a completely automated sampling
device whereby the sampling tubes are fixed in transport
racks, moved by a step engine underneath a continuous
jet of sample from a bioreactor, allowing a sampling rate of
approx. 4.5 samples per second. A completely different
approach to increase the sampling frequency, and to
minimize the number of handlings required, was developed by Weuster-Botz [11]. The basic idea was to perform
sampling, inactivation of metabolic activity, and extraction of intracellular metabolites in a continuous way in a
long tube connected to the bioreactor. In this way the
highly dynamic metabolite patterns, resulting from a
sudden disturbance of the culture in the reactor, were
fixed at a certain position in the sampling tube. After
sampling the tube was disconnected and immediately
frozen at 808C. To obtain single samples at different
reaction times the frozen tube was cut into parts. It was
demonstrated that the system could be successfully
applied to capture the short time dynamics, on a subsecond scale, of some glycolytic intermediates of chemostat cultivated Zymomonas mobilis as a response to a
glucose pulse.
A different approach for integrated sampling and extraction from a bioreactor culture has been published by
Schaub et al. [12]. Hereby short time heating of the
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

28 Analytical biotechnology

sample was used as the procedure to quench all metabolic
activity and at the same time extracting the metabolites
from the cells. This was achieved by using a helical coil
heat exchanger, which allowed continuous withdrawal of
sample from a bioreactor, whereby the broth was rapidly
heated to 958C. The helical geometry was chosen to
enhance radial mixing. After extraction the cells were
removed by filtration. This sampling device allowed
withdrawing five samples per second. The method has
been applied for the analysis of the growth rate dependent in vivo dynamics of glycolysis in Escherichia coli [13].

quickly frozen at 1968C in liquid nitrogen. With this
system a minimum time span between glucose stimulus
and quenching of less than 100 ms could be obtained. It
should be realized, however, that for aerobic conditions
the maximum reaction time with the glucose is determined by the time it takes until the available dissolved
oxygen has decreased to a limiting value. This is highly
dependent on the biomass concentration in the reactor, as
well as the maximum oxygen uptake rate of the microorganism studied, and may range from seconds to a few
tenths of seconds.

Stopped flow sampling systems

The solution is to apply a stopped flow system, which
allows gas exchange with the broth in the device. This
was accomplished by Visser et al. [18], who developed a
mini plug flow reactor, named the BioScope, wherein the
flow channel consisted of an oxygen and carbon dioxide
permeable silicon tubing. For practical reasons, and to
assure sufficient plug flow characteristics, the tubing was
configured in a serpentine geometry. The system was
equipped with 11 sample ports, including 1 sample port
before the mixing chamber where the perturbing agent
was mixed with the culture broth. The oxygen and carbon
dioxide transfer characteristics of the BioScope were
measured and were found to be sufficient for glucose
pulse experiments under the reported conditions. From
multiple glucose pulse experiments with Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, carried out in the BioScope, the authors
observed that the obtained dynamic patterns of the
glycolytic intermediates were very reproducible and
appeared to be highly similar to the patterns obtained
from a comparable glucose pulse experiment, carried out
by injecting the glucose directly into the chemostat.

Several authors have applied rapid sampling methods in
studies aimed at the elucidation of the in vivo kinetic
properties of enzymes of metabolic pathways of microorganisms. Typically this can be achieved with so-called
stimulus response experiments, whereby a culture growing under well-defined steady-state conditions is suddenly disturbed. This can be achieved for example by
injecting a concentrated glucose solution into a glucose
limited chemostat, whereafter the dynamic changes in
the intracellular metabolite levels are measured within a
timeframe of a few hundreds of seconds [10,14,15]. However, with respect to capturing the changes which occur
during the first milliseconds to seconds after the disturbance, the pulse response technique has an inherent
limitation. After injection into the bioreactor a certain
amount of time is required for the compound to be
completely mixed with the culture and to come in contact
with all cells. This mixing time depends on the reactor
type and volume, the stirring speed and the viscosity of
the culture, and may easily be several seconds. Another
disadvantage of disturbing the complete bioreactor culture is that the steady-state condition is lost after each
experiment. This can be circumvented by applying the
perturbation outside the bioreactor, for example by using
a stopped flow technique. The first authors who applied
this technique to microbial cultures, with the aim to
capture metabolite dynamics in the milliseconds range,
were De Koning and Van Dam [16]. They performed
incubations of starved yeast cells in a freeze quench
apparatus with a four jet tangential mixer to measure
the changes of glycolytic intermediates after adding a
pulse of glucose within a time frame of 15–5000 ms. A
similar stopped flow apparatus was developed by Buziol
et al. [17]. The system consisted of a sampling port with a
mixing chamber, which was mounted in the wall of the
bioreactor. By means of applying an overpressure of 0.4–
0.5 bar in the headspace the culture broth was driven out
of the reactor through a capillary into the mixing chamber,
where it was instantaneously mixed with a concentrated
glucose solution. Subsequently the broth/glucose mixture
flowed toward a cascade of five three way valves, whereby
each valve corresponded with a certain distance from the
mixing chamber and thus with a certain contact time with
the glucose solution. Samples taken from the valves were
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

Later on an improved and more robust version of the
BioScope device was developed by Mashego et al. [19].
In this design the serpentine channels were milled into
PMMA. Two mirror images of a PMMA block, with
semicircular two-dimensional serpentine channels milled
in the surface of each block, were screwed together,
separated by a silicone membrane (Figure 1). In this
way a two channel system was obtained, whereby one
of the channels was used for the flow through of cell
culture broth and the opposite channel for gas transfer, for
example for oxygen supply and carbon dioxide removal in
case of aerobic conditions, or for carbon dioxide and
oxygen removal by nitrogen flushing in case of anaerobic
conditions. A clear advantage, compared to the first BioScope design, is that in this system the gas transfer, that is
oxygen, carbon dioxide, or other gaseous compounds, can
be controlled by variation of the gas composition in the
gas channel. The observation window was between 1 and
30 s for the highest and 5 and 180 s for the lowest flow rate
applied.
The above shows that a variety of sampling systems, both
manually operated and semiautomatic, for obtaining fast
www.sciencedirect.com

Fast sampling van Gulik 29

Figure 1

(a) 2D serpentine channel geometry of the BioScope and (b) cross-section of the BioScope channel.

representative samples from bioreactor cultures of
microbes has been developed and successfully applied.

Quenching methods
Quenching procedures for metabolome measurements in
microorganisms can be divided in two main groups,
namely procedures which allow separation of cells and
supernatant, and procedures which do not. The last
category also contains methods wherein quenching and
metabolite extraction are combined. It should be realized
that methods which do not allow separation of the cells
after quenching, are only suitable to measure compounds
of which the total amounts present in the supernatant are
negligible compared to the total intracellular amounts.
Although extracellular metabolite concentrations may
often be several orders of magnitude lower than intracellular concentrations, the contribution to the measured
amount in total broth samples may still be significant,
because the volume of the extracellular medium in
laboratory cultivations is often two orders of magnitude
larger than the total cell volume.
In the early days of fast sampling from microbial cultures
separation of cells from the supernatant, for example by
filtration or centrifugation, was often applied before
quenching of the metabolism. The main reason for this
approach was to obtain a concentrated cell sample, such
that the metabolite levels were above the detection limits
of the analysis method applied. The disadvantage of this
approach was that metabolism continued for several minwww.sciencedirect.com

utes under undefined conditions with respect to temperature and the availability of substrate, oxygen, and other
nutrients, and thus that measured metabolite levels are
not representative for the applied cultivation conditions.
For this reason several researchers used immediate
quenching by direct sampling into cold perchloric acid,
followed by a series of freezing–thawing cycles, thus
achieving quenching, release of intracellular metabolites,
and inactivation of enzymes [20].
Most popular quenching method: cold methanol/water

The first authors who combined fast quenching and
subsequent separation of cells and supernatant in one
procedure were De Koning and Van Dam [16]. They used
cold ( 408C) 60% methanol for instant quenching of
yeast metabolism by spraying 15 mL of culture broth
into 60 mL of the cold solution. After the mixture was
cooled for approx. 5 min, the sample/methanol mixture
was centrifuged for 5 min at 5000 rpm at 208C to obtain
a cell pellet which was subsequently extracted. This
method is currently one of the most frequently applied
quenching methods in microbial metabolomics [21,22],
and in principle allows determining in vivo intracellular
metabolite levels without interference of the extracellular
amounts.
Metabolite leakage

An important requirement for this method to be
applicable is that the metabolites remain in the cells
during cold methanol quenching. Several authors have
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

30 Analytical biotechnology

Figure 2

Sample fractions where metabolite concentrations were measured to investigate the fate of the metabolites during quenching and further sample
processing of S. cerevisiae. Figure from Canelas et al. [23].

checked this for different microorganisms but the outcomes have been contradictory (see Canelas et al. [23]
and references therein) which has mainly been caused by
differences in sensitivity of the applied analytical
methods. However, more recent research, whereby sensitive MS-based analytical methods have been applied,
clearly shows that significant amounts of metabolites
diffuse out of the cells into the cold methanol, both for
yeast [23,24] and bacteria [25,26,27]. Canelas et al.
accurately quantified metabolite leakage during cold
methanol quenching of the yeast S. cerevisiae, by determining the levels of a large range of metabolites in total
broth and different sample fractions (see Figure 2) using
isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS), whereby
100% U-13C labeled cell extract was used as internal
standard [23]. In this way the authors could set up
accurate mass balances and track down the fate of each
metabolite during the quenching procedure. They confirmed that leakage of metabolites from yeast cells does
occur during conventional cold methanol quenching, and
presented evidence that the levels of most metabolites
have been previously underestimated by at least twofold.
It was shown that metabolite leakage could be entirely
prevented by quenching in pure methanol, at a temperature of 408C or lower (see Figure 3).
A comparable study was carried out to quantify leakage of
amino acids during cold methanol quenching of five
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

phylogenetically different yeast strains [28]. Surprisingly,
this study showed that amino acid leakage from S. cerevisiae cells was negligible during conventional cold
methanol quenching. An explanation for this discrepancy
could be that the cultivation methods (glucose-limited
chemostats versus shake-flask cultures), as well as the
yeast strains used, were different.
Quenching of prokaryotes

Also for bacteria metabolite leakage during quenching has
been investigated. Bolten et al. [26] applied the cold
methanol method for quenching of different Gram
positive and Gram negative bacteria, grown in shake
flasks. They observed that the method led to drastic
loss (>60%) of all metabolites measured because of
leakage. Similar findings were published by TaymazNikerel et al. [27], for cold methanol quenching of E.
coli cells grown in glucose-limited chemostats. These
authors applied the same procedure as previously applied
to quantify metabolite leakage from yeast cells [23],
whereby the fate of the different metabolites was tracked
down by high accuracy measurements in all sample fractions, using IDMS. Because of the observed massive
leakage of metabolites into the cold methanol quenching
solution, they proposed, and successfully applied, a differential method whereby the intracellular amounts were
obtained from metabolite measurements in total broth
and extracellular culture liquid.
www.sciencedirect.com

Fast sampling van Gulik 31

Figure 3

Full mass balance for the metabolites measured in the different sample fractions (see Figure 2) under eight different variations in sample treatment
protocol (see Table), exemplified for G6P, glutamate, and fumarate. The intracellular metabolite levels were calculated from the difference of the
concentrations in whole-broth and extracellular medium (T EX). Samples were from glucose limited chemostat cultures at D = 0.1 h 1. Data are
averages  standard deviation of at least two replicate samples, each analyzed at least in duplicate. Figure adapted from Canelas et al. [23].

Surprisingly Winder et al. [29] concluded that 60% cold
( 488C) methanol solution is the most appropriate
method to quench metabolism of E. coli. Their conclusion
was based on the measured relative recovery of some
selected metabolites and the total number of peaks
www.sciencedirect.com

detected, when comparing two variations of the cold
methanol quenching method (with and without tricine
buffer, 0.5 mM, pH 7.4), and hot ethanol quenching.
Leakage of metabolites was observed but not quantified,
and appeared more pronounced during hot ethanol
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

32 Analytical biotechnology

quenching. This is not surprising, because incubation in
hot ethanol is an efficient and often applied procedure for
the extraction of metabolites from microbial cells [30].
Because of the fact that these, and other [26,27], authors
observed metabolite leakage during cold methanol
quenching of prokaryotes, this method should not be
considered suited for these organisms. Clearly quenching
of prokaryotes seems much more problematic in comparison with eukaryotic microbes, which could be a
matter of cell membrane composition, cell surface to
volume ratio, which is much larger for prokaryotes
because they are much smaller than their eukaryotic
counterparts, and/or the phenomenon of cold shock.
Cold shock

Leakage of metabolites from bacteria during quenching
accomplished by a fast decrease of the temperature, has
been attributed to the so-called cold shock phenomenon
[25], whereby the decrease in temperature results in an
increase of the permeability of the cell membrane. Wellerdiek et al. [31] applied a microstructure heat exchanger
to analyze the cold shock effect on a time scale of seconds
using Corynebacterium glutamicum as a model organism.
They observed that fast cooling (within 220 ms) of cell
suspension from 30 to 08C resulted in rapid and significant
release (1.5–3-fold increase of the concentration in the
supernatant) of central metabolites from the cells within
1.5 s or less. From 10 s after cooling to 08C, further release
was negligible for most metabolites. Release of metabolites after rapid cooling to 08C has also been observed for
E. coli [27] and it was concluded that in this case rapid
sampling and fast filtration for measurement of the exometabolome should not include a rapid cooling step, for
example by sampling onto ice cold steel beads as proposed by Mashego et al. [32].
Alternatives for cold methanol quenching

Recently several attempts have been undertaken to
develop new or adapt existing quenching procedures
for individual microorganisms, with the aim to minimize
metabolite leakage [23,24,34,35]. Villas-Bôas and Bruheim [24] proposed a cold glycerol-saline solution as most
promising quenching fluid for yeast and bacteria. Spura
et al. [33] attempted to apply the glycerol-saline method
for the quenching of yeast and bacteria, but concluded
that it did not meet the requirements for an applicable
quenching method. They reported that the protocol
appeared very laborious, that it was impossible to get
rid of the glycerol sticking to the compact cell pellets, and
that the obtained chromatograms showed a dominating
glycerol peak, masking other metabolites.
In an attempt to develop a quenching procedure
applicable to eukaryotes as well as to Gram positive
and Gram negative prokaryotes, an alternative quenching
solution composed of 40% ethanol and 0.8% (w/v) sodium
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

chloride at 208C was proposed [33]. The performance
was compared with cold methanol quenched and
unquenched samples, held at 48C in 0.9% sodium
chloride solution. Unfortunately the relatively high final
temperatures of the quenched (above 108C), and
unquenched (48C), samples do not exclude that enzymatic conversion has taken place, which, depending on
the metabolite, can lead to increased or decreased levels.
In accordance with this, the authors reported that experiments aimed at detecting cell leakage yielded inconsistent results, that is, a direct relation between reduced
levels in the extract, and increased levels in the supernatant, which would be a clear indication of cell leakage,
could not be observed.
Faijes et al. [34] proposed quenching in cold ( 408C) 60%
(v/v) methanol buffered with 0.85% (w/v) ammonium
carbonate or with 70 mM HEPES, as most suitable for
metabolomics studies in Lactobacillus plantarum. However, they based their conclusion solely on measurements
of the leakage of ATP from the cells during quenching
and subsequent washing of the cell pellet. Published
results on accurate measurements of metabolite leakage
during quenching of S. cerevisiae and E. coli, show that the
extent of leakage is very different for different compounds [23,27], whereby relatively large polar molecules such as ATP show less leakage than smaller and
less polar molecules.
Link et al. [35] proposed quenching in a cold mixture of
methanol and glycerol (3:2 v/v) at 508C as the preferred
method for metabolome measurements in E. coli. This
method was compared with quenching in cold ( 508C)
buffered and unbuffered 60% methanol/water. Metabolite leakage was quantified by measuring the adenylates
ATP, ADP, and AMP, in cell extracts and supernatants
after cold centrifugation of the quenched sample. The
authors reported that leakage of adenylates was significantly reduced, but not completely avoided, when the
quenching was performed with cold methanol/glycerol,
and that increased concentrations in the cell extract
corresponded with decreased concentrations in the
quenching fluid.

Conclusions
To aid the measurement of true intracellular metabolite
levels of microorganisms, various manual, semiautomatic
and fully automated rapid sampling techniques have been
constructed and successfully applied. For elucidation of
in vivo kinetic properties stopped flow systems have been
developed to carry out pulse response experiments without disturbing the culture in the bioreactor. In contrast to
the development of rapid sampling systems, the development of reliable sample processing methods has been
relatively poor. To obtain meaningful metabolome data
immediate quenching of enzyme activity is required
followed by the separation of the exometabolome and
www.sciencedirect.com

Fast sampling van Gulik 33

endometabolome, without leakage of metabolites from
the cells to the quenching solution. Preferably the
method should be applicable to different species, both
eukaryotes and prokaryotes. In the literature various
methods have been proposed to be suitable for particular
microbial species. In many cases, however, the suitability
of these methods is not confirmed by the presented
results. Therefore additional effort should be directed
toward the improvement of sample processing procedures
for quantitative microbial metabolomics.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:
 of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1.

De Backer P, De Waele D, Van Speybroeck L: Ins and outs of
systems biology vis-à-vis molecular biology: continuation or
clear cut? Acta Biotheor 2009. published online October 24.

2.

Tang YJ, Martin HG, Myers S, Rodriguez S, Baidoo EE,
Keasling JD: Advances in analysis of microbial metabolic
fluxes via (13)C isotopic labeling. Mass Spectrom Rev 2009,
28:362-375.

3.

Gstaiger M, Aebersold R: Applying mass spectrometry-based
proteomics to genetics, genomics and network biology. Nat
Rev Genet 2009, 10:617-627.

4.

Oldiges M, Lütz S, Pflug S, Schroer K, Stein N, Wiendahl C:
Metabolomics: current state and evolving methodologies and
tools. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2007, 76:495-511.

5.

Lønsmann Iversen JJ: A rapid sampling valve with minimal dead
space for laboratory scale fermenters. Biotechnol Bioeng 1981,
23:437-440.

6.

Theobald U, Mailinger W, Reuss M, Rizzi M: In-vivo analysis of
glucose-induced fast changes in yeast adenine nucleotide
pool applying a rapid sampling technique. Anal Biochem 1993,
214:31-37.

7.


Schädel F, Franco-Lara E: Rapid sampling devices for
metabolic engineering applications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol
2009, 83:199-208.
Comprehensive overview of devices for rapid sampling from bioreactors.
8.

Larsson G, Törnkvist M: Rapid sampling, cell inactivation and
evaluation of low extracellular glucose concentrations during
fed-batch cultivation. J Biotechnol 1996, 49:69-82.

9.

Lange HC, Eman M, van Zuijlen G, Visser D, van Dam JC, Frank J,
Teixeira de Mattos MJ, Heijnen JJ: Improved rapid sampling for
in vivo kinetics of intracellular metabolites in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Biotechnol Bioeng 2001, 75:406-415.

10. Schaefer U, Boos W, Takors R, Weuster-Botz D: Automated
sampling device for monitoring intracellular metabolite
dynamics. Anal Biochem 1999, 270:88-96.
11. Weuster-Botz D: Sampling tube device for monitoring
intracellular metabolite dynamics. Anal Biochem 1997,
246:225-233.
12. Schaub J, Schiesling C, Reuss M, Dauner M: Integrated sampling
procedure for metabolome analysis. Biotechnol Prog 2006,
22:1434-1442.
13. Schaub J, Reuss M: In vivo dynamics of glycolysis in
Escherichia coli shows need for growth rate
dependent metabolome analysis. Biotechnol Prog 2008,
24:1402-1407.
14. Theobald U, Mailinger W, Baltes M, Rizzi M, Reuss M: In vivo
analysis of metabolic dynamics in Saccharomyces cerevisiae:
I. Experimental observations. Biotechnol Bioeng 1997,
55:305-316.
www.sciencedirect.com

15. Rizzi M, Baltes M, Theobald U, Reuss M: In vivo analysis of
metabolic dynamics in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 2.
Mathematical model. Biotechnol Bioeng 1997, 55:592-608.
16. De Koning W, Van Dam K: A method for the determination of
changes of glycolytic metabolites in yeast on a subsecond
time scale using extraction at neutral pH. Anal Biochem 1992,
204:118-123.
17. Buziol S, Bashir I, Baumeister A, Claassen W, Noisommit-Rizzi N,
Mailinger W, Reuss M: New bioreactor-coupled rapid
stoppedflow sampling technique for measurements of
metabolite dynamics on a subsecond time scale. Biotechnol
Bioeng 2002, 80:632-636.
18. Visser D, van Zuylen GA, van Dam JC, Oudshoorn A, Eman MR,
Ras C, van Gulik WM, Frank J, van Dedem GWK, Heijnen JJ: Rapid
sampling for analysis of in vivo kinetics using the BioScope: a
system for continuous-pulse experiments. Biotechnol Bioeng
2002, 79:674-681.
19. Mashego MR, van Gulik WM, Vinke JL, Visser D, Heijnen JJ: In vivo

kinetics with rapid perturbation experiments in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a second-generation
BioScope. Metab Eng 2006, 8:370-383.
Description and characterization of an improved version of the BioScope
plug flow reactor for rapid perturbation experiments outside the bioreactor and subsequent rapid sampling.
20. Weibel EK, Mor J-R, Fiechter A: Rapid sampling of yeast and
automated assays of adenylate, citrate, pyruvate and glucose6-phosphate pools. Anal Biochem 1974, 58:208-216.
21. Oldiges M, Takors R: Applying metabolic profiling techniques
for stimulus–response experiments: chances and pitfalls. Adv
Biochem Eng/Biotechnol 2005, 92:173-196.
22. Mashego MR, Rumbold K, De Mey M, Vandamme E, Soetaert W,
Heijnen JJ: Microbial metabolomics: past, present and future
methodologies. Biotechnol Lett 2007, 29:1-16.
23. Canelas AB, Ras C, ten Pierick A, van Dam JC, Heijnen JJ, van
 Gulik WM: Leakage-free rapid quenching technique for yeast
metabolomics. Metabolomics 2008, 4:226-239.
First authors who carried out highly accurate measurements, using
isotope dilution mass spectrometry, of a large number of different metabolites in different sample fractions to verify metabolite leakage during
cold methanol quenching and further sample processing in S. cerevisiae.
On the basis of these results an improved version of the cold methanol
quenching method is proposed.
24. Villas-Bôas SG, Bruheim P: Cold glycerol-saline: the
promising quenching solution for accurate intracellular
metabolite analysis of microbial cells. Anal Biochem 2007,
370:87-97.
25. Wittmann C, Kromer JO, Kiefer P, Binz T, Heinzle E: Impact of the
cold shock phenomenon on quantification of intracellular
metabolites in bacteria. Anal Biochem 2004, 327:135-139.
26. Bolten CJ, Kiefer P, Letisse F, Portais JC, Wittmann C: Sampling

for metabolome analysis of microorganisms. Anal Chem 2007,
79:3843-3849.
Different rapid sampling procedures were tested for the quantification of
metabolite leakage from different Gram positive and Gram negative
bacteria.
27. Taymaz-Nikerel H, De Mey M, Ras C, ten Pierick A, Seifar RM, Van

Dam JC, Heijnen JJ, van Gulik WM: Development and
application of a differential method for reliable
metabolome analysis in Escherichia coli. Anal Biochem 2009,
386:9-19.
The authors carried out highly accurate measurements, using isotope
dilution mass spectrometry, of a large number of different metabolites in
different sample fractions to verify metabolite leakage during cold methanol quenching and further sample processing in E. coli. On the basis of the
observed massive leakage of metabolites they proposed and successfully applied a differential method for metabolome measurement in E. coli.
28. Bolten CJ, Wittmann C: Appropriate sampling for intracellular
amino acid analysis in five phylogenetically different yeasts.
Biotechnol Lett 2008, 30:1993-2000.
29. Winder CL, Dunn WB, Schuler S, Broadhurst D, Jarvis R,
Stephens GM, Goodacre R: Global metabolic profiling of
Escherichia coli cultures: an evaluation of methods for
Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

34 Analytical biotechnology

quenching and extraction of intracellular metabolites. Anal
Chem 2008, 80:2939-2948.
30. Gonzalez B, Francois J, Renaud M: A rapid and reliable method
for metabolite extraction in yeast using boiling buffered
ethanol. Yeast (Chichester, England) 1997, 13:1347-1355.
31. Wellerdiek M, Winterhoff D, Reule W, Brandner J, Oldiges M:

Metabolic quenching of Corynebacterium glutamicum:
efficiency of methods and impact of cold shock. Bioprocess
Biosyst Eng 2009, 32:581-592.
Interesting application of a microstructure heat exchanger to examine the
short-term impact of rapid cooling on the release of metabolites from
bacteria.
32. Mashego MR, van Gulik WM, Vinke JL, Heijnen JJ: Critical
evaluation of sampling techniques for residual glucose

Current Opinion in Biotechnology 2010, 21:27–34

determination in carbon-limited chemostat culture of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol Bioeng 2003, 83:
395-399.
33. Spura J, Reimer LC, Wieloch P, Schreiber K, Buchinger S,
Schomburg D: A method for enzyme quenching in microbial
metabolome analysis successfully applied to Gram-positive
and Gram-negative bacteria and yeast. Anal Biochem 2009,
394:192-201.
34. Faijes M, Mars AE, Smid EJ: Comparison of quenching and
extraction methodologies for metabolome analysis of
Lactobacillus plantarum. Microb Cell Fact 2007, 6:27.
35. Link H, Anselment B, Weuster-Botz D: Leakage of adenylates
during cold methanol/glycerol quenching of Escherichia coli.
Metabolomics 2008, 4:240-247.

www.sciencedirect.com

