Journal of Chromatography B, 825 (2005) 111–123

The effect of the mobile phase additives on sensitivity in the analysis
of peptides and proteins by high-performance liquid
chromatography–electrospray mass spectrometry
M.C. Garcı́a ∗
Departamento de Quı́mica Analı́tica, Facultad de Quı́mica, Universidad de Alcalá, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain
Received 15 December 2004; accepted 22 March 2005
Available online 26 April 2005

Abstract
The study of the effect of mobile phases on sensitivity in the analysis of peptides and proteins by high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC)–electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) has been the aim of this review. Reversed-phase chromatography (RPLC) is the chromatographic mode most suitable for coupling with ESI-MS since mobile phases containing organic modifiers are used. The analysis of proteins
and peptides by RPLC mostly involves the use of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as an ion-pairing agent despite its being a strong suppressor of the
MS signal. Different studies reporting the effects of using other ion-pairing agents (other perfluorinated acids, acetic acid, formic acid, etc.)
and buffers (ammonium acetate, ammonium formate, ammonium bicarbonate, morpholine, etc.) in RPLC–ESI-MS of proteins and peptides
did not yield a single strong candidate that could generally replace TFA. The enhancement in sensitivity with other reagents observed in some
cases strongly depended on the analyte, the experimental conditions used, and the mass spectrometer and, usually, it did not compensate for
the loss in separation resolution related to TFA. The examples of direct coupling of affinity, size-exclusion, or ion-exchange chromatography
(IEC) to ESI-MS are very limited because of incompatibilities related to the use of mobile phases containing high salt concentrations. To
overcome this problem, an intermediate desalting step is needed. Multidimensional chromatography, microdialysis, and ion-capture modules
can be used to couple these chromatographic modes with ESI-MS. Multidimensional chromatography with RPLC as a second dimension has
most often been used. Although most examples involve the trap and analysis in the second dimension of a certain part of the first separation,
some comprehensive analyses of the entire sample in the second dimension have also appeared.
© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Reversed-phase chromatography; Size-exclusion chromatography; Ion-exchange chromatography; Affinity chromatography; Protein; Peptide;
Electrospray mass spectrometry

1. Introduction
In order to understand the role biomolecules play in biochemical processes, it is important to develop methods for
their identification. Since in most cases there is a clear limitation of the sample amount, these methods have to enable
the sensitive detection of these molecules. Mass spectrometry
(MS) is the detection technique most widely used for this purpose. Nevertheless, this technique requires the use of more or
less clean samples in order to obtain suitable detection limits.
∗

Tel.: +34 918854915; fax: +34 918854971.
E-mail address: concepcion.garcia@uah.es.

1570-0232/$ – see front matter © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jchromb.2005.03.041

Matrix components coeluting with a target analyte may affect
its ionisation and thus provide no valid results [1].
In order to overcome this problem, a separation technique
enabling the clean up of a sample or the preconcentration
of analytes prior to detection is needed. High-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) has been widely coupled to
electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) for the
analysis of proteins and peptides. Nevertheless, the performance of HPLC–ESI-MS can be compromised if no adequate
mobile phases are chosen. In fact, the eluent choice in ESIMS is severally restricted to volatile compounds while mobile
phases typically used for the separation of proteins and peptides by HPLC may not be readily volatile and, therefore, not

112

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

compatible with the electrospray process [2]. A suitable eluent for electrospray ionisation should contain an organic modifier (methanol or acetonitrile) and a volatile buffer whose
concentration could also be critical; concentrations that are
too high may result in the suppression of the analyte signal,
while concentrations that are too low may lead to poor peak
shape and efficiency.
This review is mainly centred on HPLC–ESI-MS for the
analysis of peptides and proteins although certain relevant
examples comprising the analysis of other organic molecules
have also been included. The effect of the mobile phases additives used in every chromatographic mode on the sensitivity
in HPLC–ESI-MS and the problems faced in each case to
match LC with ESI-MS have been reviewed.

2. Reversed-phase chromatography
Reversed-phase chromatography (RPLC) constitutes a
powerful tool for the separation of very heterogeneous samples and has been widely used in combination with mass
spectrometry detection. RPLC is the chromatographic mode
which best matches ESI-MS since the mobile phases used
present low ionic strengths and contain organic modifiers.
The chemical composition of these mobile phases plays an
important role both in the chromatographic separation and in
the mass spectrometer performance.
Mobile phases used in RPLC for the analysis of proteins
and peptides contain an additive which is working as an ionpairing agent. This component increases the hydrophobic-

ity of molecules by forming ionic pairs with their charged
groups. As a consequence, interaction of the molecules with
the hydrophobic stationary phase is possible and, therefore,
so is their separation. Moreover, these additives usually yield
very high or low pHs and promote protein unfolding and denaturation. Thus, molecules are present in the same random
coil conformation, eluting in sharper and more symmetrical
peaks [3–5].
Table 1 shows the ion-pairing agents most used in the separation of proteins and peptides by RPLC. As can be seen, these
additives are added to the mobile phase in low concentrations.
The ion-pairing agent most widely used for the separation of
proteins and peptides is trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) although
reagents such as acetic acid or phosphate buffer have also
been employed. As well as ion-pairing agents, other additives
such as sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), urea, and mercaptoethanol can also be added to the mobile phase to improve
separation. Unfortunately, many of these compounds result
in deleterious detection by ESI-MS.
In fact, typical RPLC mobile phases containing phosphate
buffer or TFA result in low sensitivity in the detection of proteins and peptides by ESI-MS. Salts and other non-volatile
compounds are not suitable for ESI-MS since they can deposit
on the ion source. This would result in capillary obstruction
affecting the sensitivity and the accuracy of the quantitative
analysis. Nevertheless, volatility is not the only limitation. A
widely used volatile reagent such as TFA is also not suitable
for sensitive mass spectrometry detection. In fact, TFA forms
very strong ion pairs with analytes that can not be broken
apart in the conditions used in the electrospray ionisation in-

Table 1
Ion-pairing agents used in the analysis of proteins and peptides by RPLC [5–10]
Eluent
Perfluorinated carboxylic acids
Trifluoroacetic acid
Heptafluorobutytic acid
Others: nonafluoropentanoic acid, tridecafluoroheptanoic acid,
pentadecafluorooctanoic acid, etc.
Other acids
Acetic acid
Formic acid
Hydrochloric acid
Salts
Phosphate buffer (pH 2–9)
Triethylammonium phosphate (pH 4)
Formate (ammonium, trialkylammonium or pyridinium salt)
Acetate (ammonium, trialkylammonium or pyridinium salt)
Perchlorate
Ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7–11)
Ammonium sulfate (pH 4)
Alkylsulfonates/alkylsulfates (e.g., heptanesulfonate)
Teraalkylammonium salts (e.g., tetrabutylammonium salts)
Alkylamines (e.g., triethylamine, dodecylamine, pyridine)
(acetate, formate or phosphate)
Bases
Morpholine

Concentration in
mobile phase

Characteristics

0.05–0.5%
10–50 mM
10–50 mM

Very volatile
Volatile
Retention controlled by the alkyl chain-length; volatile

0.5–1 M
20–60%
5 mM

Volatile
Volatile; lower resolution and recovery than TFA
Volatile and corrosive

10–20 mM
125 mM
20–200 mM
20–200 mM
100 mM
50–100 mM
125 mM
10–15 mM
10 mM
10 mM

Not volatile
Not volatile
Volatile
Volatile
Not volatile
Volatile
Not volatile
Retention controlled by the alkyl chain-length; not volatile
Retention controlled by the alkyl chain-length; not volatile
Volatile

10 mM

Volatile

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

terface preventing the ionisation of analytes. Moreover, TFA
also results in spray instability and signal reduction due to the
high conductivity and high surface tension of the eluent [3].
Consequently, ion-pairing agents allowing for a compromise
between a sensitive mass detection and an efficient chromatographic separation are required for suitable RPLC–ESI-MS
performance.
Numerous attempts have been made to achieve this compromise. One approach has been the reduction of the detrimental effects derived from the use of TFA by the addition
of an organic sheath liquid. In fact, the use of an organic
auxiliary liquid has been demonstrated to help the generation
of ions in the electrospray process [11–13]. The most recent
trial base on the use of an auxiliary liquid was developed by
Apffel et al. [3]. They proposed the post-column addition of a
highly concentrated weak acid (RCOOH) which would compete with TFA (strong acid) to pair with the analyte. As the
weak acid is present in a high concentration, the competition
between TFA and the weak acid would be driven towards the
deprotonation of the weak acid:
CF3 COO− + RCOOH  CF3 COOH ↑ + RCOO−
Consequently, the protonated TFA could be evaporated
from the droplet and the analyte would form ion pairs with
the new anion (RCOO− ). As these ion pairs would be
weaker than those previously formed with the TFA anion,
the presence of the analyte in its protonated form would
be promoted. Apffel and his colleagues tried different organic acids (propionic acid, valeric acid, formic acid, acetic
acid, and butyric acid) added post-column at concentrations ranging from 0 to 20% in an organic carrier solvent.
With the exception of formic acid, the rest of the additives resulted in enhanced sensitivity, with propionic acid
observed to perform best. They also tried different organic
carrier solvents (2-propanol, acetonitrile, methanol, ethanol,
butanol-acetonitrile, 2-methoxyethanol, 2-methoxyethanol2-propanol, and 2-methoxyethanol-butanol) since this could
also affect the stability and intensity of the signal. The postcolumn addition of propionic acid-2-propanol (75:25, v/v) in
a 1:2 proportion in the HPLC mobile phase resulted in an
overall 10- to 100-fold improvement in the signal-to-noise
ratio. Fig. 1 shows the effect of the addition of propionic
acid-2-propanol in the analysis of different amounts of a tryptic digest of lysozyme by RPLC–ESI-MS using TFA. In all
cases, significant increases in the MS signal were observed
when the auxiliary acid was added. Similar improvements
were also detected with other ion-pairing agents such as heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA) and hydrochloric acid. Nevertheless, these interesting results were only valid for small
proteins and peptides but not with larger proteins in whose
case it is not possible to break up enough ion pairs formed
with TFA to efficiently recover the signal.
Different studies were focused on the discovery of alternatives to TFA which do not interfere with the ion-formation
process while still yielding acceptable chromatographic behaviour. The first studies were performed with thermospray

113

(TSP) RPLC–MS since problems similar to those observed
in ESI were found. In fact, TSP performance is also highly
dependent on mobile phase composition requiring the presence of volatile buffers. Voyksner and Haney [14] evaluated
the effect of different volatile buffers (ammonium carbonate,
ammonium bicarbonate, ammonium acetate, ammonium formate, and triethylamine) on the analysis of organic molecules.
They found better results when using ammonium acetate and
ammonium formate, whereas the strong bases (carbonate, bicarbonate, and triethylamine) yielded the lowest sensitivities.
The authors supported these results on the basis of a competition mechanism between analytes and buffer for protons and
attributed the low signal observed when using basic buffers to
their stronger affinity for protons than the analytes. They also
studied the influence of the concentration on sensitivity, with
the buffer ammonium acetate yielding the highest signal. By
increasing its concentration to 0.08 M, an increase in the MS
response was observed. Higher concentrations of buffer did
not result in a significant increase in sensitivity. These results were similar to those obtained by Duchateau et al. [15]
who, some years later, confirmed the applicability of ammonium formate, ammonium acetate, and ammonium bicarbonate for the analysis of three decomposition products of an ␣dipeptide by RPLC–MS. The separation of these compounds
by RPLC and UV detection had been described several times
using alkylsulphonates as ion-pairing agents. These authors
tested the analysis of these compounds by RPLC–MS using
TFA, ammonium formate, ammonium acetate, and ammonium bicarbonate as volatile reagents. Even though ammonium formate resulted in the highest signal-to-noise ratio, it
yielded very poor resolution. The presence of 8 mM TFA in
the mobile phase significantly improved separation without
increasing background signal.
The first studies with ESI compared its performance when
analysing organic compounds dissolved in different LC eluents containing ion-pairing agents. Miller and Fisher [16]
tried different volatile (valeric acid (a weak ion-pairing agent)
and perfluoroheptanoic acid (a strong ion-pairing agent))
and non-volatile reagents (heptane sulphonic acid) in the
positive mode and in the negative mode (tributylamine (a
strong, volatile ion-pairing agent), tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (a strong, non-volatile ion-pairing agent) as ionpairing agents for the analysis of organic compounds using
ESI-MS. As expected, volatile ion-pairing agents (valeric
acid, perfluoroheptanoic acid, and tributylamine) yielded
higher responses than non-volatile agents (heptane sulphonic
acid and tetrabutylammonium hydroxide). In addition, the
signal observed was, in some cases, related to the volatility
of the analyte itself, the most volatile producing the highest signals. Temesi and Law [17] also studied the effect of
TFA, formic acid, and ammonium acetate on the MS response observing the best results with formic acid and the
worst with TFA. Furthermore, analyte responses decreased
with an increased concentration of the ion-pairing agent (in
the range 1–100 mM) and significant variations of the signal
were detected depending on whether the organic modifier

114

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

Fig. 1. Peptide maps of tryptic digests of different amounts of lysozyme by RPLC–ESI-MS (with and without postcolumn addition of propionic acid-2-propanol)
and RPLC–UV. With permission from ref. [3].

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

Fig. 2. Influence of the mobile phase additive on the detectability of proteins
(cytochrome c (CYT), lysozyme (LYS), and carbonic anhydrase (CAH)) by
RPLC-ESI-MS. With permission from ref. [19].

was methanol or acetonitrile. In this respect, Vanhoutte et al.
[18] discovered an important dependence of sensitivity on
the percentage of organic modifier used in the mobile phase
when using a nano-electrospray interface. This dependence
was also related to the nature and concentration of the buffer.
Thus, sensitivity was significantly reduced when less than
40% methanol was present in the mobile phase using a 0.1 M
ammonium acetate buffer, while this percentage decreased
to 20% when the buffer was removed. As well as methanol
and acetonitrile, trifluoroethanol or hexafluoroisopropanol,
known for their tendency to stabilize the secondary structure
of peptides, have also been used as organic modifiers [19].
Moreover, non-polar solvents such as chloroform in combination with polar solvents (methanol/water) and acidified
with acetic acid or TFA have successfully been applied for
the analysis of hydrophobic peptides [19].
From the experience of previous work focussing on the
analysis of small peptides and other organic molecules (e.g.
drugs), formic acid and acetic acid were seen to be the most
promising candidates for the replacement of TFA in the analysis of proteins and peptides by RPLC–ESI-MS. Huber and
Premstaller [20] compared the performance of acetic acid,
formic acid, and TFA for the analysis of proteins with molecular masses ranging from 14,000 to 80,000. Fig. 2 shows the
influence of the mobile phase additive on the detectability of
these proteins. They found a 35- to 160-fold improvement in
protein detectability when using 0.1% formic acid in comparison to 0.1% TFA. This improvement was significantly
greater than that obtained by Liu et al. [21] who observed
a three-fold increase in MS sensitivity with 2% formic acid
in comparison to 0.1% TFA, although in this case a different
method and instrumentation were used. Even so, in both cases
the improvement in sensitivity obtained was in detriment of
the separation efficiency, with increases ranging from 32 to
104% in peak width at half height when substituting TFA for
acetic or formic acid. This loss in efficiency did not consti-

115

tute a problem when working with standard proteins or with
very clean samples, nor with peptides in which case RPLC
with acetic acid or formic acid resulted in minimal chromatography penalty. Nevertheless, there should be a better
balance between separation performance and sensitivity detection when more complex samples are used.
An example is observed in the work of Corradini et al. [22]
who tried TFA, formic acid, and acetic acid for the analysis of
a more complex kind of protein (membrane proteins binding
chlorophylls isolated from spinach leaves) by RPLC–ESIMS. Despite the fact that formic and acetic acid showed less
signal suppression than TFA in ESI-MS, these acids gave
poorer resolution. In this particular case, the decrease in resolution was so critical that the authors suggested the use of a
lower percentage of TFA (0.05%) as the most suitable alternative for the analysis of these proteins. The use of low TFA
concentrations minimised signal suppression in comparison
with 0.1% TFA. Moreover, part of the decrease in sensitivity
observed in comparison with other ion-pairing agents such as
formic acid was regained through the increase in sample concentration entering the mass spectrometer and derived from
the sharper peaks encountered when using TFA [3].
Other approaches have been the use of mobile phases containing mixtures of different ion-pairing agents [23,24] and
the use of other perfluorinated carboxylic acids with longer
n-alkyl chains than TFA [25,26].
The idea of using mixtures of TFA with other volatile
ion-pairing agents in the mobile phase was first applied in
TSP–MS by Duchateau et al. [15] who suggested the use
of a mixture of TFA with formic acid for sensitive and high
resolution RPLC–MS. Some years later other authors applied
the same idea for the detection of proteins by RPLC–ESIMS. Clarke et al. [23] selected a mixture of 0.5% acetic acid
and 0.02% TFA to reach a balance between sensitivity and
resolution in the detection of amyloid-␤ polypeptides while
Chong et al. [24] used mobile phases containing 0.1% TFA
and formic acid in concentrations ranging from 0.2 to 0.3%
for the analysis of protein fractions from human breast cancer
whole cells using a non-porous RPLC column coupled to
ESI-MS.
Regarding the use of other perfluorinated carboxylic acids
other than TFA, Elfakir and co-workers [9,25,26] compared
the effect of using tridecafluoroheptanoic acid (TDFHA),
HFBA, nonafluoropentanoic acid (NFPA), and pentadecafluorooctanoic acid (PDFOA) as ion-pairing agents related to
TFA for the analysis of amino acids by RPLC. They studied the effect of the concentration and length of the side
alkyl chain of the perfluorinated acid on the MS response
and chromatographic selectivity, respectively. As expected,
the best separation of amino acids was obtained with the
perfluorinated reagent with the longest chain (PDFOA) using a classical silica column. Nevertheless, this agent did not
yield the best separation when the silica column was replaced
by a graphitic carbon column. Moreover, they also observed
increasing signal intensities at higher ion-pairing concentrations [25]. These results contrasted with those observed by

116

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

other authors [27,28] and with those observed by the same
authors when using other experimental conditions [26]. In
these cases, the presence of a significant concentration of
ion-pairing agent in the mobile phase resulted in analyte signal suppression.
The same perfluorinated acids (TFA, HFBA, TDFHA,
NFPA, and PDFOA) were applied two years later by the
same group for the analysis of 23 small peptides (with masses
ranging from 133 to 613) by RPLC–ESI-MS [29]. They observed TFA and HFBA (the agents containing the shortest
side chains) were not efficient enough to separate most polar peptides. PDFOA (the agent containing the longest side
chain) resulted in a very high retention time but not the best
selectivity. Although, in principal, both NFPA and TDFHA
yielded good peptide separations, the higher volatility of
NFPA, its lower re-equilibration time, and its general higher
selectivity lead to the choice of this reagent for the LC–MS
analysis of small peptides.
More recent papers describe the results obtained when
comparing the performance of ion-pairing agents of a different nature in the analysis of peptides and proteins by
RPLC–ESI-MS. TFA, HFBA, acetic acid, and formic acid
have been compared in the analysis of peptide mixtures [30].
TFA gave the best resolution while HFBA was the ion-pairing
agent yielding the worst separation, and acetic and formic
acid provided a better balance. Regarding detection, formic
acid yielded the strongest (100 times higher than TFA) signal by ESI-MS. They also compared the separation obtained
when using methanol and acetonitrile as organic modifiers.
In general, better resolution, selectivity, symmetry, and efficiency were observed with acetonitrile.
One recent work [31] studied the effect of different
reagents (TFA, formic acid, ammonium formate, and phosphate buffer) at constant low pH (2.3–3.2) in the separation
of basic peptides. The worst separations were observed with
formic acid. This was attributed to reduced column capacity
derived from an increased mutual repulsion of charge peptides in the stationary phase surface when low ionic strength
buffers such as formic acid were used. As inorganic salts are

non-volatile and TFA is a signal suppressor, the authors suggested the use of ammonium formate since its ionic strength
was high enough to reduce column overloading.
Garcı́a et al. [32] tried a wide range of reagents in the positive mode at pHs ranging from 2 to 11.5 for their performance
in the separation of standard proteins by RPLC–ESI-MS. The
compounds used were: TFA, formic acid, acetic acid, HFBA,
ammonium acetate (pH 3 and 6), ammonium formate (pH 3
and 6), ammonium bicarbonate, ammonium hydroxide, and
morpholine. Formic acid (0.2%) was the additive yielding the
highest responses (in FIA experiments) followed by acetic
acid (0.3%), ammonium formate (10 mM, pH 3), and ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM, pH 9), while the worst results
were observed with TFA, ammonium formate (pH 6), and
ammonium acetate (pH 6). The effect of the variation of the
concentration on the MS signal with the ion-pairing agents
giving the highest responses (formic acid, acetic acid, ammonium formate (pH 3), and ammonium bicarbonate (pH 9)) was
also investigated using FIA experiments (Fig. 3). In general,
responses increased initially and decreased when very high
concentrations were used with the exception of ammonium
bicarbonate in which case no such decrease was observed.
These selected ion-pairing agents were tested for the separation of standard proteins in comparison with TFA. Ammonium formate (pH 3) and ammonium bicarbonate (pH 9) did
not result in any separation of the protein tested. Although the
separation quality was worse than that observed with TFA,
formic acid and acetic acid were the only agents enabling that
separation. Nevertheless, problems related to a poor recovery
of proteins in the separation column when using formic acid
and the significant signal suppression observed when TFA
was employed, made neither of them suitable for the sensitive detection of the proteins by RPLC–ESI-MS. The use of
0.3% acetic acid as an additive in RPLC–ESI-MS provided
a suitable balance between mass response and separation of
proteins in LC–MS. Furthermore, the comparison of calibration curves obtained by FIA with those observed when the
separation took place showed an increase in the sensitivity
when the column was connected [32].

Fig. 3. Variation of the signal (expressed in percentage related to the maximum signal) obtained by ESI-MS for 2 ␮M solutions of myoglobin and cytochrome
c with different buffers. With permission from ref. [32].

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

As can be seen, and despite the efforts to the contrary,
TFA continues to be the ion-pairing agent most widely
used with no solid alternative having been discovered, especially when complex separations are required. In fact,
the use of other additives proposed as alternatives to TFA
resulted in ruined separations when complex samples are
used as in the case of proteomic and mapping studies. The
only change proposed in these cases to alleviate the suppression effects of TFA has been the reduction of its concentration to 0.05%, although accompanied by a small decrease in chromatographic performance [33–35]. More recently, Naidong [36] reported that the addition of acetic acid
to a mobile phase containing TFA resulted in reduced ionisation suppression while chromatographic peak shape was
preserved.

3. Hydrophilic-interaction chromatography
Liquid chromatography has been used for the reduction
of matrix interferences in mass spectrometry. Nevertheless,
very polar compounds are poorly retained on a reversedphase column and this weak analyte retention may result in
detrimental matrix effects. Moreover, the use of very high
aqueous mobile phases, such as those used in RPLC, can
compromise the spray formation and be critical for sensitivity. One approach to achieve better sensitivity and column
retention could be the use of hydrophilic-interaction chromatography. This chromatographic mode uses polar mobile
phases containing low water and high organic modifier proportions, more favourable for the electrospray process. Unlike normal phase chromatography, hydrophilic-interaction
chromatography uses water-miscible organic solvents such
as acetonitrile instead of water-immiscible ones such as hexane or chloroform [36]. This chromatographic mode has been
applied to the analysis of polar analytes in LC–MS and could
be an alternative to RPLC for the separation of some kinds
of peptides.

4. Chromatographic modes involving the use of salts
The application of ESI-MS as a detection technique
has centred on the chromatographic modes using volatile
buffers such as RPLC. Ionic HPLC systems (hydrophobicinteraction, affinity, ion-exchange, and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)) have had much less success due to the
incompatibility of ESI-MS with the non-volatile buffers commonly used in these chromatographic modes. In fact, the
use of mobile phases containing inorganic salts affects the
electrospray stability and provokes the formation of adduct
peaks. Adduct formation makes molecular ions of the sample
disperse among many different species at different mass-tocharge ratios (m/z) resulting in decreased sensitivity and complicated mass spectra. Nevertheless, when the preservation of
biological activity and native structure is required, chromato-

117

graphic modes involving the use of salts are preferred and,
consequently, the interest in coupling these chromatographic
modes with ESI-MS is clear.
4.1. Hydrophobic-interaction chromatography (HIC)
Hydrophobic-interaction chromatography and RPLC are
related techniques, but stationary phases are less hydrophobic
and, therefore, operate under less denaturing conditions. One
of the main differences with RPLC are the elution solvents
used. HIC gradients begin with a very high ionic-strength
solvent (high concentration salt solutions) and end with low
concentration salt solutions or with the addition of organic additives (e.g. ethylene glycol or isopropanol) while in RPLC,
elution gradients start with aqueous buffers and end with an
organic solvent (e.g. acetonitrile). Although there are no examples of the use of HIC coupled on-line with ESI-MS, a
few examples can be found for the off-line combination with
MALDI [37,38].
4.2. Afﬁnity chromatography
Affinity chromatography, especially frontal affinity chromatography (FAC), has been coupled on-line with ESI-MS
as a screening technique, as a purification technique, and
as a preconcentration technique for the analysis of proteins
and peptides [39]. FAC consists of the continuous infusion
of analytes (potential ligands) through a column containing
an immobilized biological receptor (e.g. a protein or a cell
fragment). The elution time for each analyte is related to its
binding strength. Thus, the strongest the binding of an analyte in the column results in the longest retention time. The
coupling of FAC with ESI-MS allows for the monitoring of
eluted analytes. For that purpose, the elution buffer used has
to enable the elution of retained compounds and provide a
suitable sensitivity in ESI-MS.
FAC–ESI-MS has been used to screen oligosaccharide,
peptide, and enzyme inhibitor libraries against an antibody, a
lectin, and protease ligands [40–43]. In all cases, the FAC–MS
system consisted of three syringes in parallel containing the
test sample, the elution buffer, and the makeup solution that
were connected to a pump by a switching valve connected
to the inlet of the affinity column. The outlet of the affinity
column was connected to a tee for the addition of makeup
buffer that flowed directly to the ESI-MS. The elution buffer
and makeup solution used were compatible with the electrospray process and consisted of 2 mM ammonium acetate
(pH 6.6) and 10% (v/v) of the elution buffer in acetonitrile,
respectively.
Ogata et al. [44,45] designed a lab-on-valve apparatus for
coupling FAC and ESI-MS which enabled bead regeneration,
column repacking, and repetitive measurements in minutes.
This system was applied to screen the binding of immobilized streptavidin to biotin containing conjugates, and the
binding of a peptide mixture to certain proteins (human and
Trypanosoma brucei tPex5). In this case, the elution buffer

118

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

consisted of 4.5 mM 2,2-difluoroethylamine, 2.3 mM acetic
acid (pH 7.0) [45].
Another mode of affinity chromatography that has been
coupled with ESI-MS for the analysis of proteins and peptides
is immobilized metal-ion affinity chromatography (IMAC).
This technique is based on the selective complexation of
electron-donating groups, such as phosphate, cysteine, tryptophan, and histidine, with an appropriate immobilized metal
ion (e.g. Fe (III)). However, optimal conditions for the elution
of proteins from an IMAC column are not compatible with
ESI-MS and result in very low detection limits and poor separations. In this respect, Nuwaysir and Stults [46] developed an
on-line IMAC (Fe (III))–ESI-MS method for the determination of phosphopeptides and phosphoproteins. They observed
that the limiting factors in sensitivity of IMAC–ESI-MS derived from the use of eluents incompatible with ESI-MS were
less important than sample losses derived from sample handling in off-line experiments.
Different alternatives have been proposed to couple IMAC
and ESI-MS: off-line IMAC followed by solid-phase extraction (SPE)–capillary electrophoresis (CE)–ESI-MS [47],
off-line IMAC followed by RPLC–ESI-MS [48,49], online IMAC–CE–ESI-MS [50], off-line IMAC–RPLC followed by ESI-MS [51], and on-line IMAC–RPLC–ESIMS [52–55]. Of these approaches, on-line multidimensional
chromatography–ESI-MS is the most popular option and will
be reviewed below.
4.3. Ion-exchange chromatography (IEC)
Ion-exchange chromatography has widely been used for
the separation of proteins and peptides since both of them
contain amino acids or carbohydrates with groups that can be
positively or negatively charged. In ion-exchange separations
of proteins and peptides, the composition of the mobile phase
plays a decisive role. Usually, protein to be isolated is bound
to an ion-exchanger and then sequentially separated by linear
or step variations of the mobile phase composition (salt concentration or pH) resulting in decreasing interactions between
the protein and the stationary phase. It is possible to distinguish four types of ion-exchangers: weak anion, weak cation,
strong anion, and strong cation. The terms weak and strong
are related to the degree of ionisation of the ion-exchanger
as a function of pH. Strong ion-exchangers are fully ionised
over a broader pH range (2–12) while weak ion-exchangers
are charged at pHs ranging from 9.5 to 5.5.
When applying IEC to the separation of peptides and proteins, cation-exchange is the main choice. At pHs lower than
3, negative charges of carboxyl groups are neutralized, which
protonates the N-terminus making them ready to be fractionated by cation-exchange chromatography. In the anionexchange mode, the opposite is required. Thus, carboxylic
groups have to be negatively charged while the N-terminus
are neutralized. This situation involves the use of mobile
phases with pHs greater than 12 which are not compatible
with most chromatographic columns based on silica [56].

Direct IEC–ESI-MS is possible using as eluents organic
modifiers such as acetonitrile, and volatile reagents such as
ammonium formate or formic acid [57,58]. Loughlin et al.
[58] used IEC–ESI-MS to separate highly polar peptides (glutathione and its related products) employing chromatographic
conditions compatible with mass detection. These conditions
consisted of a gradient elution with phase A being 0.1% (v/v)
formic acid in water/acetonitrile (1/1) and phase B being 0.2%
(v/v) formic acid in water/acetonitrile (1/1) [58].
Despite these examples, in most cases the elution in IEC
involves the use of high salt concentrations that suppress
ionisation and result in deposits of non-volatile salts at the
ion source inlet. Consequently, the connection of this chromatographic mode with ESI-MS has mostly been carried
out by the prior removal of salts, primarily through offline methods. Alternative on-line desalting methods have
also been developed. In some cases, these methods involved multidimensional chromatography using a reversedphase column, the incorporation of an ion-capture module,
or on-line dialysis [21,59–66]. These possibilities will be
discussed below.
Salt gradient is the usual elution mode in IEC. Nevertheless, there is an alternative elution mode in IEC that does not
require high salt concentrations in the mobile phase and is
based on the change of the eluent pH. This mode, called chromatofocusing, is, in principle, more compatible with ESI-MS
detection and could be very promising for the direct analysis
of proteins and peptides by IEC–ESI-MS. For that purpose,
weak ion exchangers are needed and two buffers are used: an
equilibration buffer defining the upper pH of the separation
gradient, and a focusing buffer defining the lower pH of the
gradient. The pH gradient formed inside the ion-exchange
column enables the elution of bound proteins in order of decreasing isoelectric points. An on-line coupling of chromatofocusing and mass spectrometry has been carried out for the
determination of nucleoside triphosphates. For that purpose,
mobile phases consisting of ammonium acetate in acetonitrile
at pH 6 (buffer A) and pH 10.5 (buffer B) were employed [67].
Other examples of coupling of chromatofocusing and ESIMS involving the use of an intermediate RPLC separation
will be discussed below [68].
4.4. Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)
Size-exclusion chromatography is a technique enabling
the separation of analytes according to their hydrodynamic
volumes. Stationary phases used consist of porous materials
with size-defined cavities. Molecules smaller than the pore
size enter the cavity and travel through the chromatographic
column. Compared to other chromatographic modes, SEC
provides limited resolving power. Nevertheless, this chromatographic mode is used extensively due to the fact that it
demonstrates a universal separation principle: size can be applied to the analysis of all biological molecules. Moreover,
SEC is also known as a biologically friendly chromatographic
mode since elution conditions, in general, do not promote

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

protein denaturation. In fact, mobile phases used in SEC normally consist of buffers at pHs ranging from 6.5 to 8. In some
cases, a small proportion of an organic modifier (acetonitrile
or methanol) is also added. In order to take advantage of SEC,
a universal detection system such as mass spectrometry is required. Nevertheless, the connection of SEC to ESI-MS is restricted due to the use of high concentrations of non-volatile
buffers (e.g. KH2 PO4 , NaCl, Na2 SO4 , etc.) to overcome interactions between the stationary phase and the protein, as
well as protein–protein interactions [37,69].
SEC has been coupled off-line to MS for the analysis
of biopolymers. There are very few examples of methods
based on the direct coupling of SEC with MS with the exception of the detection of inorganic elements in biological samples by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry [70]. Moreover, the limited number of examples of online SEC–MS have been applied to the analysis of small
molecules (small peptides or polysaccharides such as heparin) using ESI [71–73]. In most of these cases, volatile mobile phases containing acetonitrile and TFA (for peptides) or
methanol and ammonium bicarbonate (for heparin) were employed. Prokai and Simonsick coupled SEC and ESI-MS and
demonstrated that the use of tetrahydrofuran containing 10−5
to 10−4 M of a sodium salt as a mobile phase provided a stable electrospray [74]. Naylor and co-workers [75–77] developed different on-line SEC–ESI-MS methods for the detection of protein–protein, protein–DNA, and protein–metal interactions without requiring any desalting or buffer-exchange
protocol. Mobile phases containing volatile salts such as ammonium acetate and ammonium bicarbonate were employed
in these studies. Fig. 4 shows the spectra and deconvolution
obtained from the SEC–ESI–MS analysis of the inhibitory effect of disulfiram on the rmALDH (mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase) enzyme using 5 mM ammonium acetate in
water as a mobile phase.
Lecchi and Abramson [78,79] interfaced SEC with an
innovative MS technique called chemical reaction interface
mass spectrometry (CRIMS) for the analysis of biopolymers.
This system did not provide information about the molecular
weight of intact molecules but about the elemental and isotopic composition of any organic molecule after its decomposition by a chemical reaction with a gas (e.g. SO2 ) into
low-molecular-weight products. These authors tested different buffer solutions containing volatile salts since volatile
buffers previously used in SEC–ESI-MS (e.g., TFA) resulted
in unacceptable chromatographic separations derived from
the interactions between proteins and the column. They observed that ammonium acetate was the buffer that worked
the best for polysaccharides (dextrans, heparin) and nucleic
acid polymers (RNA, oligonucleotides), while for proteins
(thyroglobulin, catalase, collagen, transferrin, albumin, carbonic anhydrase, lysozime, and insulin) the best separation
was obtained with triethylammonium formate (pH 3) in water/tetrahydrofuran (2/1).
The coupling of SEC to RPLC and ESI-MS is reviewed
below [80–82].

119

Fig. 4. Spectra and deconvolution obtained from the SEC–ESI-MS analysis of the inhibitory effect of disulfiram on the rmALDH (mitochondrial
aldehyde dehydrogenase) enzyme. With permission from ref. [75].

5. On-line desalting methods
5.1. Multidimensional chromatography
Multidimensional HPLC separations are enjoying great
acceptance for the analysis of proteins and peptides. This
technology, first described by Giddings [83], enables a significant increase in system peak capacity and has widely
been used for the separation of very complex samples when
a single chromatographic mode does not provide for suitable resolution and results in fractions enriched with similar
components. Multidimensional chromatography also enables
the on-line coupling of chromatographic methods using high
salt concentrations with ESI-MS. In fact, most multidimensional separations used first dimensional separations needing high salt concentrations while RPLC is the final dimension due to its desalting ability. Thus, the sample arrives at
the mass detector in its most desirable form for electrospray
ionisation.
Multidimensional separations mainly consist of the trapping of the effluent from the first separation column (that
involving the use of salts) on a reversed-phase column while
salts and other unwanted compounds are washed off the col-

120

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

umn and directed to waste [38]. Nevertheless, in principle,
salt containing mobile phases are not compatible with RPLC
since the solubility of salts and its miscibility are highly related to the presence of organic modifiers. Thus, optimising
buffer conditions will be needed in every case.
Other limitations can arise when testing the coupling of
chromatographic modes with different flow rates, as is true
of SEC and RPLC. Separations by SEC are carried out at
low flow rates, whereas separations by RPLC employ higher
flow rates. In order to overcome this problem, a preconcentration device between the two systems could be used [23]. An
SEC–RPLC–ESI-MS system was applied to the analysis of
peptides using ammonium acetate–acetonitrile–water as elution solvent in SEC and a gradient water–acetonitrile–acetic
acid/TFA for the separation in RPLC.
Tuyten et al. [52] applied IMAC–RPLC–ESI-MS to the
analysis of nucleotides. They developed a column-switching
set-up preventing the on-line coupling of the IMAC column
(precolumn) with the analytical column (RP column) thus
avoiding contamination of the RPLC–ESI-MS system with
possible metal leaking from the IMAC column. In order to do
so, they introduced the concept of an elution plug. The elution
of the sample from the IMAC column to the RPLC column
was performed by injecting only 20 ␮L of a suitable solvent
from the autosampler. Since conditions enabling the appropriate clean up of a sample by IMAC could ruin the analytical
separation by RPLC, they studied the influence of different
eluents (ammonium hydroxide, ammonium acetate, and ammonium phosphate in different concentrations and pHs and
water) on the performance of IMAC and RPLC. In all cases,
a methanol makeup flow was added through a tee in order to
improve electrospray performance and sensitivity. Although
ammonium phosphate (pH 4.7) yielded better results from
a chromatographic point-of-view, an ammonium phosphate
buffer (pH 8.0) was chosen since only this yielded satisfactory
elution from the IMAC column. Nevertheless, the sensitivity
of the system was still unsatisfactory partly due to the use of
an ammonium phosphate buffer in the mobile phase in the
RPLC separation which resulted in significant background
and possible ion suppression [52].
Apffel et al. [53] described a multidimensional affinity
chromatography–RPLC–ESI-MS method for peptide mapping of digested glycoproteins. Two immobilized lectin affinity columns were used to fractionate glycopeptides according
to glycosilation type (N-linked glycopeptides in a Concanavalin A column, and O-linked glycopeptides in a column
with different immobilized lectins) while non-glycolysated
peptides were retained in a C18 column. Finally, the isolated
fractions were sequentially separated in an analytical
reversed-phase column and detected by ESI-MS. Samples
were loaded and washed off the lectin column with salt containing mobile phases and the mobile phase used in RPLC
was the typical one consisting of water–acetonitrile–TFA although in this case, as previously described, the postcolumn
addition of propionic acid-isopropanol resulted in reduced
signal suppression due to TFA.

An on-line coupling of affinity chromatography to ESIMS has also been developed for the purification and identification of transferrin isoforms from diluted serum using an
immunoaffinity column with immobilized anti-human transferrin [54]. The connection of the affinity column with the
mass spectrometer was performed by a C4 column.
Canarelli et al. [55] developed a multidimensional chromatographic separation/reactor with ESI-MS for the on-line
verification of the identity and integrity of (recombinant) proteins. The protein was first captured in an affinity column,
automatically transferred to an immobilized trypsin column
for digestion, and then the resulting peptides were separated
by RPLC and detected by ESI-MS. The carrier buffer in
the affinity separation consisted of a phosphate buffer (pH
7.0) containing sodium chloride and the elution buffer was
a solution containing glycine, guanidine, and dithiothreitol
(pH 3.0). The digestion buffer was ammonium bicarbonate
(pH 8.5) containing cysteine. The outline of the digesting
column was connected to a reversed-phase column and the
separation of peptides was successfully accomplished with
water–acetonitrile–formic acid.
Chromatofocusing has also been used for the separation
of biomolecules as first dimension followed by RPLC–ESIMS. Chong et al. [68] applied this technique to the separation
of proteins from human breast epithelial whole-cell lysates
in an off-line combination with RPLC–ESI-MS.
In addition to these multidimensional configurations in
which only part of the effluent from the first dimension is directed to the second dimension (heart cutting systems), there
are also some examples of comprehensive systems developed
for the analysis of peptides and proteins by ESI-MS. This alternative configuration enables the entire eluent from the first
dimension to be subjected to the second dimension.
While there are numerous examples of methods based on
the first approach, the number of comprehensive LC–LC systems is quite limited. Moreover, most examples of comprehensive systems do not use MS detection but optical detection
techniques [84]. Opiteck et al. [59] applied a comprehensive
system previously used with UV detection to the analysis of
proteins by ESI-MS. The system used a cation-exchange column as the first dimension and a reversed-phase column as the
second dimension. The columns were connected through an
eight-port switching valve with two loops. As one loop was
filling with eluent from the ion-exchange column, the other
loop was pumping out through the reversed-phase column.
The ion-exchange separation was carried out by gradient elution and mobile phases consisting of sodium/ammonium formate, urea, and acetonitrile. The reversed-phase separation
used a typical water–acetonitrile gradient containing 0.05%
TFA.
Another approach has been the use of a unique column
for the first dimension and different columns in the second
dimension. Opiteck et al. [80,82] designed a comprehensive
system consisting of one size-exclusion column connected
to two parallel reversed-phase columns. The analyte eluting
from the size-exclusion dimension was transferred alter-

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

natively to one of the two reversed-phase columns. While
one reversed-phase column was being loaded with the
effluent from the SEC column, the second RPLC column
(already loaded) was running the separation [80,82]. The
mobile phases used in the RPLC separation consisted of
water–acetonitrile–TFA while SEC separations were carried
out with a salt solution [80] or with a solvent containing
water–TFA [82]. Wagner et al. [60] developed a method for
protein mapping by coupling an ion-exchange column with
two parallel reversed-phase columns. Using this configuration they also coupled a restricted-access material (RAM)
with ion-exchange functionalities in the first dimension
with four reversed-phase columns for analysing proteins
and peptides from a human hemofiltrate [61]. They used
a phosphate buffer gradient for the elution in IEC and a
water–acetonitrile–TFA gradient for the separation in RPLC.
Link et al. [62] have combined multidimensional IEC and
RPLC with tandem mass spectrometry to identify proteins
in biological samples using a single column containing
both stationary phases. Complex peptides were loaded into
the column in an acidic pH and, in an iterative process, a
fraction of the peptide was displaced from the ion-exchange
part to the reversed-phase part by a salt-step gradient. This
displaced fraction was separated in the reversed-phase part
and directed to the ESI-MS. After re-equilibration, another
fraction of peptides was displaced from the ion-exchange
material by the use of an increased salt concentration and
separated by RPLC. This technology was optimised and automated two years later by Yates and co-workers [63,64] who
called it multidimensional protein identification technology
(MudPIT). This device used a unique microcapillary column
containing two kinds of chromatographic packing materials,
a strong cation-exchange and a reversed-phase. Mobile
phases for IEC and RPLC were compatible with mass
detection. The IEC separation was accomplished by gradient
elution with mobile phases consisting of 5% ACN–0.02%
HFBA and containing ammonium acetate. Mobile phases
used for the gradient elution of peptides from the reversedphase column consisted of water–acetonitrile–HFBA. They
compared the performance of this system when using acetic
acid instead of HFBA observing that the use of HFBA
enabled the identification of a higher number of proteins and
peptides, especially low-abundance peptides.
5.2. Microdialysis
Microdialysis has also been used as a desalting system.
This technique incorporates a dialysis membrane into a microprobe. The integration of microdialysis on-line with other
analytical techniques such as HPLC or CE has resulted in
increased sample throughput and experimental efficiency
[85,86].
The first applications of microdialysis as an on-line desalting device were developed for direct ESI-MS and no chromatographic separation took place [87–89]. Wu et al. [90]
described an on-line microdialysis system for the desalting

121

Fig. 5. ESI-MS spectra of apomyoglobin in 10 mM ammonium acetate and
250 mM sodium chloride obtained from direct infusion (A) and after on-line
microdialysis (B). With permission from ref. [90].

of samples for ESI-MS that was applied to the analysis of proteins and peptides. Fig. 5 shows the effect of microdialysis on
the mass spectrum of apomyoglobin. The direct infusion of
the protein in 10 mM ammonium acetate and 250 mM sodium
chloride produced a no interpretable spectrum due to sodium
adduction. A significant improvement in spectrum quality
was observed when samples were microdialyzed before detection. Moreover, the signal-to-noise ratio increased by a
factor of more than 40 after desalting. The same group used
this technique for the analysis of oligonucleotides and DNA
[91,92]. They also proposed a dual-microdialysis configuration for a fast clean up of complex biological samples such
as whole-cell lysate for ESI-MS. In the first stage, the system
enabled the removal of high-molecular-weight components
while low-molecular-weight components such as salts were
removed in the second stage [93]. A miniaturized version of
microdialysis has also been constructed and applied to the
rapid clean up of biological samples for ESI-MS [94].
The applications of microdialysis to desalt effluents from
chromatographic separations have been more recent. Liu
and Verma [66] developed a cation-exchange HPLC–online microdialysis–ESI-MS system that was applied to
the analysis of peptides and proteins. Cation-exchange
chromatography was carried out with non-volatile mobile
phases (phase A consisted of a Tris–HCl buffer and phase B
was the same buffer containing 500 mM NaCl). The effluent
was desalted by microdialysis against an ammonium acetate
buffer. Moreover, they observed that the sensitivity of the
method increased at lower dialysis-buffer concentrations, at

122

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123

higher dialysis temperature, and when adding a sheath liquid
consisting of 2% acetic acid in methanol [66].
Canarelli et al. [95] also developed a microdialysis system allowing the on-line coupling of ESI-MS with LC methods requiring the use of salts. They applied this system to
the separation of proteins by affinity chromatography-, IEC, and SEC–ESI-MS. In all separations, salt solutions were
employed for the elution of proteins (glycine buffer in affinity chromatography, Tris–HCl buffer and a gradient of NaCl
in IEC, and a phosphate buffer containing NaCl in SEC).
The effluents were split at 10 ␮L/min and dialysed against a
5 mM acetic-acid solution. To enhance protein ionisation, a
1:1 (v/v) mixture of (A) 10% formic acid in water and (B) 2%
formic acid in water–acetonitrile (1:1) was used as a makeup
solvent.
5.3. Ion capture
Another approach for on-line desalting in mass spectrometry detection is the use of ion-capture modules. These devices
usually consist of chromatographic materials and constitute
an alternative to full high-performance liquid chromatography systems [96]. Emmett and Caprioli [97] developed a
concentration desalting device integrated in a capillary needle and containing C18 chromatographic packing material.
The sample, consisting of peptides and proteins, was desalted on-line and directly sprayed from this capillary needle
[97]. Benson et al. [77] developed a rapid in-line desalting
(RILED) system consisting of a small gel cartridge that was
coupled to ESI-MS. The system was applied to the analysis
of protein complexes and protein–metal interactions established in salt solutions. The results were compared with those
obtained by SEC observing that RILED provided a much
faster high-throughput desalting than conventional SEC. Ionexchange resins have also been used as desalting matrices
for the analysis of biomolecules prior to ESI-MS [98].

6. Conclusions
There is a great interest for coupling chromatographic
techniques and ESI-MS, with RPLC being the chromatographic mode which best matches with ESI-MS and the one
most widely coupled. While much effort has been focused
on instrumental improvements, not much has been done regarding the intrinsic incompatibilities of both techniques. Trifluoroacetic acid continues to be the ion-pairing agent most
often used for the separation of peptides and proteins by
RPLC–ESI-MS despite the fact that its use results in limited
sensitivity. The efforts aimed at looking for other reagents that
work better in ESI-MS and that enable a suitable separation
have not yielded any solid alternative. Moreover, the results
observed are not conclusive and, in some cases, can even be
contradictory because the experimental and instrumentation
conditions as well as the sample itself can dramatically affect
the results. Chromatographic modes involving the use of mo-

bile phases containing salts present even greater limitations
when coupling with ESI-MS. Although there are some examples enabling the direct coupling of these chromatographic
modes with ESI-MS using volatile mobile phases, most couplings involve the use of an intermediate desalting step. The
desalting procedure can comprise a full high-performance
liquid chromatography separation in which RPLC is the second dimension. Other approaches include microdialysis and
the use of ion-capture devices.

References
[1] B. Law, D. Temesi, J. Chromatogr. B 748 (2000) 21.
[2] J.F. Banks, C.M. Whitehouse, Method Enzymol. 270 (1996) 486.
[3] A. Apffel, S. Fischer, G. Goldberg, P.C. Goodley, F.E. Kuhlmann, J.
Chromatogr. A 712 (1995) 177.
[4] K.D. Nugent, W.G. Burton, T.K. Slattery, B.F. Johnson, J. Chromatogr. 443 (1988) 381.
[5] H. Schlüter, in: M. Kastner (Ed.), Protein Liquid Chromatography,
Journal of Chromatography Library, vol. 61, Elsevier, Amsterdam,
2000, p. 147.
[6] G. Winkler, P. Briza, C. Kunz, J. Chromatogr. 361 (1986) 191.
[7] M.T.W. Hearn, Ion-pair chromatography of amino acids, peptides,
and proteins, in: M.T.W. Hearn (Ed.), Ion-pair chromatography. Theory and biological and pharmaceutical applications, Marcel Dekker,
New York, 1985, p. 207.
[8] J.D. Pearson, M.C. McCroskey, J. Chromatogr. A 746 (1996) 277.
[9] K.N. Petritis, P. Chaimbault, C. Elfakir, M. Dreux, J. Chromatogr.
A 833 (1999) 147.
[10] Y. Chen, C.T. Mant, R.S. Hodges, J. Chromatogr. A 1043 (2004)
99.
[11] R.D. Smith, C.J. Barinaga, H.R. Udseth, Anal. Chem. 60 (1988)
1948.
[12] C.E. Parker, J.R. Perkins, K.B. Tomer, Y. Shida, K. O’Hara, M.
Kono, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 3 (1992) 563.
[13] D.F. Hunt, R.A. Henderson, J. Shabanowitz, K. Sakaguchi, H.
Michel, N. Sevilir, A.L. Cox, E. Appella, V.H. Engelhard, Science
255 (1992) 1261.
[14] R.D. Voyksner, C.A. Haney, Anal. Chem. 57 (1985) 991.
[15] A.L.L. Duchateau, B.H.M. Munsters, G.T.C. Kwakkenbos, R.G.J.
Van Leuken, J. Chromatogr. 552 (1991) 605.
[16] C. Miller, S. Fisher, Impact of ion-pair reagents on LC/MS analysis,
Agilent Technologies Application (2000).
[17] D. Tamesi, B. Law, LC–GC North Am. 17 (1999) 626.
[18] K. Vanhoutte, W.V. Dongen, E.L. Esmans, Rapid Commun. Mass
Spectrom. 12 (1998) 15.
[19] B. Mehlis, U. Kertscher, Anal. Chim. Acta 352 (1997) 71.
[20] C.G. Huber, A. Premstaller, J. Chromatogr. A 849 (1999) 161.
[21] H. Liu, S.J. Berger, A.B. Chakraborty, R.S. Plumb, S.A. Cohen, J.
Chromatogr. B 782 (2002) 267.
[22] D. Corradini, C.G. Huber, A.M. Timperio, L. Zolla, J. Chromatogr.
A 886 (2000) 111.
[23] N.J. Clarke, F.W. Crow, S. Younkin, S. Naylor, Anal. Biochem. 298
(2001) 32.
[24] B.E. Chong, F. Yan, D.M. Lubman, F.R. Miller, Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrom. 15 (2001) 291.
[25] P. Chaimbault, K. Petritis, C. Elfakir, M. Dreux, J. Chromatogr. A
855 (1999) 191.
[26] P. Chaimbault, K. Petritis, C. Elfakir, M. Dreux, J. Chromatogr. A
870 (2000) 245.
[27] T.R. Covey, A.P. Bruins, J.D. Henion, Org. Mass Spectrom. 23
(1988) 178.

M.C. Garcı́a / J. Chromatogr. B 825 (2005) 111–123
[28] K.W.N. Siu, R. Guevremont, J.C.Y. Le Blanc, G.J. Gardner, S.S.
Berman, J. Chromatogr. 554 (1991) 27.
[29] K. Petritis, S. Brussaux, S. Guenu, C. Elfakir, M. Dreux, J. Chromatogr. A 957 (2002) 173.
[30] H.J. Issaq, S.D. Fox, M. Mahadevan, T.P. Conrads, T.V. Veenstra, J.
Liq. Chromatogr. Related Technol. 26 (2003) 2255.
[31] D.V. McCalley, J. Chromatogr. A 1038 (2004) 77.
[32] M.C. Garcı́a, A.C. Hogenboom, H. Zappey, H. Irth, J. Chromatogr.
A 957 (2002) 187.
[33] G. Heine, M. Raida, W.G. Forssmann, J. Chromatogr. A 776 (1997)
117.
[34] A. Premstaller, H. Oberacher, W. Walcher, A.M. Timperio, L. Zolla,
J.P. Chervet, N. Cavusoglu, A. Dorsselaer, C.G. Huber, Anal. Chem.
73 (2001) 2390.
[35] D.B. Kassel, B. Shushan, T. Sakuma, J.P. Salzmann, Anal. Chem.
66 (1994) 236.
[36] W. Naidong, J. Chromatogr. B 796 (2003) 209.
[37] B.J. Compton, L. Kreilgaard, Anal. Chem. 66 (1994) 1175A.
[38] K.M. Millea, I.S. Krull, J. Liq. Chromatogr. Related Technol. 26
(2003) 2195.
[39] W.C. Lee, K.H. Lee, Anal. Biochem. 324 (2004) 1.
[40] D.C. Schriemer, D.R. Dundle, L. Li, O. Hindsgaul, Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 37 (1998) 3383.
[41] D.C. Schriemer, O. Hindsgaul, Comb. Chem. High Throughput
Screening 1 (1998) 155.
[42] B. Zhang, M.M. Palcic, H. Mo, I.J. Goldstein, O. Hindsgaul, Glycobiology 11 (2001) 141.
[43] B. Zhang, M.M. Palcic, D.C. Schriemer, G. Alvarez-Manilla, M.
Pierce, O. Hindsgaul, Anal. Biochem. 299 (2001) 173.
[44] Y. Ogata, L. Scampavia, J. Ruzicka, C.R. Scott, M.H. Gelb, F. Turecek, Anal. Chem. 74 (2002) 4702.
[45] Y. Ogata, L. Scampavia, T.L. Carter, E. Fran, F. Turecek, Anal.
Biochem. 331 (2004) 161.
[46] L.M. Nuwaysir, J.T. Stults, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 4 (1993)
662.
[47] D. Figeys, S.P. Gygi, Y. Zhang, J. Watts, M. Gu, R. Aebersold,
Electrophoresis 19 (1998) 1811.
[48] S. Li, C. Dass, Anal. Biochem. 270 (1999) 9.
[49] S.B. Ficarro, M.L. McCleland, P.T. Stukenberg, D.J. Burke, M.M.
Ross, J. Shabanowitz, D.F. Hunt, F.M. White, Nat. Biotechnol. 20
(2002) 301.
[50] P. Cao, J. Stults, J. Chromatogr. A 853 (1999) 225.
[51] J.D. Watts, M. Affolter, D.L. Krebs, R.L. Wange, L.E. Samelson, R.
Aebersold, J. Biol. Chem. 269 (1994) 29520.
[52] R. Tuytten, F. Lemière, W.V. Dongen, H. Slegers, R.P. Newton, E.L.
Esmans, J. Chromatogr. B 809 (2004) 189.
[53] A. Apffel, J.A. Chakel, W.S. Hancock, C. Souders, T.M. Timkulu,
E. Pungor Jr., J. Chromatogr. A 750 (1996) 35.
[54] J.M. Lacey, H.R. Bergen, M.J. Magera, S. Naylor, J.F. O’Brien, Clin.
Chem. 47 (2001) 513.
[55] S. Canarelli, I. Fisch, R. Freitag, J. Chromatogr. B 775 (2002)
27.
[56] A.J. Link, Trends Biotechnol. 20 (2002) 8.
[57] G.J. Dear, R.S. Plumb, B.C. Sweatman, P.S. Parry, A.D. Roberts, J.C.
Lindon, J.K. Nicholson, I.M. Ismail, J. Chromatogr. B 748 (2000)
295.
[58] A.F. Loughlin, G.L. Skiles, D.W. Alberts, W.H. Schaefer, J. Pharmaceut. Biomed. Anal. 26 (2001) 131.
[59] G.J. Opiteck, K.C. Lewis, J.W. Jorgenson, R.J. Anderegg, Anal.
Chem. 69 (1997) 1518.
[60] K. Wagner, K. Racaityte, K.K. Unger, T. Miliotis, L.E. Edholm, R.
Bischoff, G. Marko-Varga, J. Chromatogr. A 893 (2000) 293.
[61] K. Wagner, T. Miliotis, G. Marko-Varga, R. Bischoff, K.K. Unger,
Anal. Chem. 74 (2002) 809.

123

[62] A.J. Link, J. Eng, D.M. Schieltz, E. Carmack, G.J. Mize, D.R. Morris, B.M. Garvik, J.R. Yates, Nat. Biotechnol. 17 (1999) 676.
[63] D.A. Wolters, M.P. Washburn, J.R. Yates III, Anal. Chem. 73 (2001)
5683.
[64] M.P. Washburn, D. Wolters, J.R. Yates III, Nat. Biotechnol. 19 (2001)
242.
[65] M.T. Davis, J. Beierle, E.T. Bures, M.D. McGinley, J. Mort, J.H. Rubinson, C.S. Spahr, W. Yu, R. Lurthy, S.D. Patterson, J. Chromatogr.
B 752 (2001) 281.
[66] C. Liu, S.S. Verma, J. Chromatogr. A 835 (1999) 93.
[67] G. Shi, J. Wu, Y. Li, R. Geleziunas, K. Gallagher, T. Emm, T. Olah,
S. Unger, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 16 (2002) 1092.
[68] B.E. Chong, F. Yan, D.M. Lubman, F.R. Miller, Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrom. 15 (2001) 291.
[69] G.B. Irvine, J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 56 (2003) 233.
[70] S. Mounicou, J. Meija, J. Caruso, Analyst 129 (2004) 116.
[71] J. Herinksen, L.H. Ringborg, P. Roepstorrf, J. Mass Spectrom. 39
(2004) 1305.
[72] Y.T. Li, Y.L. Hsieh, J.D. Henion, M.W. Senko, F.W. McLafferty, B.J.
Ganem, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 115 (1993) 8409.
[73] I. Nylander, K. Tanno, A. Winter, J. Silberring, Life Sci. 57 (1995)
123.
[74] L. Prokai, W.J. Simonsick, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 7 (1993)
853.
[75] M.L. Shen, L.M. Benson, K.L. Johnson, J.J. Lipsky, S. Naylor, J.
Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 12 (2001) 97.
[76] J. Cavanagh, R. Thompson, B. Bobay, L.M. Benson, S. Naylor, Biochemical 41 (2002) 7859.
[77] L.M. Benson, R. Kumar, J. Cavanagh, S. Naylor, Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrom. 17 (2003) 267.
[78] P. Lecchi, F.P. Abramson, J. Chromatogr. A 828 (1998) 509.
[79] P. Lecchi, F. Abramson, Anal. Chem. 71 (1999) 2951.
[80] G.J. Opiteck, S.M. Ramirez, J.W. Jorgenson, M.A. Moseley, Anal.
Biochem. 258 (1998) 349.
[81] P. Lecchi, A.R. Gupte, R.E. Perez, L.V. Stockert, F.P. Abramson, J.
Biochem. Biophys. Methods 56 (2003) 141.
[82] C.J. Opiteck, J.W. Jorgenson, Anal. Chem. 69 (1997) 2283.
[83] J.C. Giddings, Anal. Chem. 56 (1984) 1258A.
[84] M.M. Bushey, J.W. Jorgenson, Anal. Chem. 62 (1990) 161.
[85] E.H. Kerns, K.J. Volk, S.E. Klohr, M.S. Lee, J. Pharmaceut. Biomed
Anal. 20 (1999) 115.
[86] L. Yang, C.S. Lee, S.A. Hofstadler, R.D. Smith, Anal. Chem. 70
(1998) 4945.
[87] K. Benkestock, P.O. Edlund, J. Roeraade, Rapid Commun. Mass
Spectrom. 16 (2002) 2054.
[88] E.S.M. Lutz, M. Larsson, Chromatographia 49 (1999) 28.
[89] J.C. Hannis, D.C. Muddiman, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 13
(1999) 323.
[90] Q. Wu, C. Liu, R.D. Smith, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 101
(1996) 835.
[91] C. Liu, Q. Wu, A.C. Harms, R.D. Smith, Anal. Chem. 68 (1996)
3295.
[92] C.L. Liu, D.C. Muddiman, K.Q. Tang, R.D. Smith, J. Mass Spectrom. 32 (1997) 425.
[93] C. Liu, S.A. Hofstadler, J.A. Bresson, H.R. Udseth, T. Tsukuda, R.D.
Smith, Anal. Chem. 70 (1998) 1797.
[94] N. Xu, Y. Lin, S.A. Hofstadler, D. Matson, C.J. Call, R.D. Smith,
Anal. Chem. 70 (1998) 3553.
[95] S. Canarelli, I. Fisch, R. Freitag, J. Chromatogr. A 948 (2002) 139.
[96] J.P. DeGnore, S. Konig, W.C. Barrett, P.B. Chock, H.M. Fales, Rapid
Commun. Mass Spectrom. 12 (1998) 1457.
[97] M.R. Emmett, R.M. Caprioli, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom. 5 (1994)
605.
[98] C.G. Huber, M.R. Buchmeiser, Anal. Chem. 70 (1998) 5288.

