Meeting report

Royston Goodacre

comment

Metabolomics shows the way to new discoveries
Address: School of Chemistry, The University of Manchester, Sackville Street, Manchester, M60 1QD, UK.
E-mail: Roy.Goodacre@manchester.ac.uk

Published: 31 October 2005
reviews

Genome Biology 2005, 6:354 (doi:10.1186/gb-2005-6-11-354)
The electronic version of this article is the complete one and can be
found online at http://genomebiology.com/2005/6/11/354
© 2005 BioMed Central Ltd

information

Genome Biology 2005, 6:354

interactions

The metabolome comprises the quantitative complement of
all the low-molecular-weight molecules present in cells in a

refereed research

The analysis of the metabolome drew nearly 300 academic
and industrial scientists together this summer at the Tsuruoka Town Campus of Keio University, in Japan, for the
first annual meeting of the recently formed Metabolomics
Society [http://www.metabolomicssociety.org]. Some were
interested in the many technological developments that are
needed for metabolomics, while others were involved in the
integrative analyses of the metabolome (with proteomics
and transcriptomics) to generate predictive and hypothesisgenerating mathematical models with the aim of better
understanding the cell at the systems level. The application
of metabolomics spans the human, plant and microbial sciences, and there were many presentations on the search for
metabolite biomarkers that can serve as indicators of disease
progression or response to therapeutic intervention.

Classic studies in microbial metabolism used radioactively
labeled substrates to define new metabolic pathways. It is
therefore not surprising that similar strategies using substrates labeled with heavy isotopes, which can be detected by
mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),
are now being used for pathway discovery. What is surprising is the interconnectivity of previously unrelated pathways
revealed by these studies. This was the subject of Henri
Brunengraber’s (Case School of Medicine, Cleveland, USA)
fascinating account of pathway discovery by the association
of metabolomics and mass analysis of isotopomers (isotopic
isomers). Brunengraber’s strategy was to use isotopomers of
metabolites generated by labeling with a variable number of
heavy atoms in specific positions. The fate of these labeled
metabolites can be readily assayed by mass spectrometry of
metabolite extracts from, for example, rat livers that had
been perfused with labeled metabolites. His presentation
demonstrated how this approach could be used to identify
unknown reactions between ostensibly completely different
pathways, which would have been missed without the use of

deposited research

Since the 1950s the central dogma of molecular biology has
been a linear conception of the cell where the general flow of
information goes from gene to transcript to protein.
Enzymes encoded by the genes then affect metabolic pathways and lead to changes in the phenotype of the organism.
This traditional thinking is no longer accepted, however, and
cellular processes are in reality organized into interlocking
networks, with many feedback loops, and should rather be
represented as dynamic protein complexes interacting with
neighborhoods of metabolites. The construction, visualization and understanding of these metabolic networks, whose
variables constitute the metabolome, is certainly a major
challenge for systems biology, as is a full understanding of
the fluxes through metabolic neighborhoods and their
control.

particular physiological or developmental state. The measurement of the entire metabolic pool is one goal for
metabolomics. Major challenges when measuring the
metabolome are posed by its chemical complexity and the heterogeneity of metabolites, and the wide dynamic range of
these biochemical species. Thus there is a need to develop
parallel, high-throughput analyses. An insight into one
approach was presented by Tomoyoshi Soga (Institute for
Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Japan)
who described studies using capillary electrophoresis, which
separates metabolites on the basis of their charge and size.
Once separated, the metabolites are detected using time-offlight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS). Using this approach to
identify and measure both anionic and cationic analytes,
Soga claimed that around 80% of the metabolites in
Escherichia coli can be accurately quantified, and one can
perhaps envisage that the remainder will become ‘visible’ to
capillary electrophoresis after appropriate derivatization.

reports

A report on the First Annual Meeting of the Metabolomics
Society, Tsuruoka, Japan, 20-23 June 2005.

354.2 Genome Biology 2005,

Volume 6, Issue 11, Article 354

Goodacre

specific substrate labeling. Similar studies using tracer-based
metabolite profiling were also detailed by Paul Lee and Laszlo
Boros (Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, USA). Lee
discussed the cellular response to a precursor in terms of
specific changes in the direction and magnitude of the redistribution of metabolic intermediates, and showed how
tracer-based metabolomics can be used to follow this. Boros
showed a more specific example of the same approach,
which is termed SIDMAP (stable isotope-based dynamic
metabolic profiling). It was applied to mutation analysis in
human fibroblast cell lines that led to the identification of
changes in metabolic networks after pulsing cells with a
labeled D-glucose tracer.
Integrative biology was the theme of the talk by Bernhard
Palsson (University of California, San Diego, USA), who
described his group’s work on the plasticity of the E. coli
metabolome during adaptive evolution. Palsson reviewed
some of the team’s pioneering work on network biology using
constraint-based modeling, and also described more recent
work on the estimation of kinetic parameters from metabolic
networks using a method involving so-called k-cones. The
core of this work comprises experiments in which E. coli K-12
MG1655 is taken through a series of defined adaptive stages
to increase the production of lactic acid. During the evolutionary process the organism’s genome was resequenced to
identify mutational changes, and these changes were correlated with changes in metabolite levels.
Part of the meeting was devoted to a discussion on standards
for metabolomics experiments. Given the chemical diversity
of metabolites, the multitude of analytical platforms needed
for their accurate quantification, and the increasing number
of data-analysis strategies that are being developed, standards are clearly needed. Metabolomics (like transcriptomics
and proteomics) especially needs good databases to store
metabolite data and the associated metadata (data about the
data). Two current approaches to standardization highlighted
at the meeting are the Architecture for Metabolomics
(ArMet), the data model for plant metabolomics developed at
the University of Aberystwyth, UK [http://www.armet.org],
and the Standard Metabolic Reporting Structure (SMRS)
[http://www.smrsgroup.org], which is being developed by a
consortium of universities and pharmaceutical and industrial companies together with the European Bioinformatics
Institute and the UK Medical Research Council.
Many new developments were presented at this year’s
meeting, and given the great excitement in this blossoming
field, ‘Metabolomics 2006’, to be held in Boston, should be
an even more interesting trip.

Genome Biology 2005, 6:354

http://genomebiology.com/2005/6/11/354

