Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 386 (2009) 268–272

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc

A novel application of metabolomics in vertebrate development
Shunsuke Hayashi a, Shinichi Akiyama b, Yutaka Tamaru b, Yasuaki Takeda c, Toshinobu Fujiwara d,e
Kunio Inoue c, Akio Kobayashi a, Shingo Maegawa f,*, Eiichiro Fukusaki a,*
a

Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, 2-1 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan
Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Bioresources, Mie University, Tsu 514-8507, Japan
c
Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodaicho, Nadaku, Kobe 657-8501, Japan
d
Department of Chemical Science and Engineering, Kobe University, 1-1 Rokkodaicho, Nadaku, Kobe 657-8501, Japan
e
Precursory Research for Embryonic Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 4-1-8 Honcho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
f
Department of Intelligence Science and Technology, Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto University, Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 31 May 2009
Available online 11 June 2009

Keywords:
Metabolomics
Zebraﬁsh
Development
Fingerprinting
PLS

a b s t r a c t
Many studies have demonstrated the functions of individual genes associated with embryogenesis and
have determined the genome sequences of several organisms. Despite the availability of enormous
amount of genetic information, dynamic changes that occur during embryogenesis have not yet been
completely understood. In order to understand the dynamic processes involved in embryogenesis, we
employed the metabolomic approach. The results of our study indicated that there is a close correlation
between metabolomes and developmental stages. Our method enables the identiﬁcation of embryonic
stages using metabolomes as ‘‘ﬁngerprints.” In this manner, we could successfully predict embryonic
development on the basis of metabolomic ﬁngerprints. This is the ﬁrst report describing a model for predicting vertebrate development by using metabolomics.
Ó 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
The genomes of several organisms have been sequenced and
published in an attempt to understand mechanisms underlying
biological activities such as evolution and early embryogenesis.
Although the amount of genomic information has been increasing
rapidly, the mechanism of biological activities has not yet been
completely understood. It is difﬁcult to determine the time and site
of activation of individual genes involved in vertebrate development and to understand cell behavior associated with gene function solely on the basis of genomic information. In order to
understand the transmission of information encoded in the genome, systematic approaches such as transcriptome analysis using
microarray and proteome analysis using mass spectrometry have
been developed [1,2]. Both the approaches are important for examining the spatiotemporal pattern of transfer of genetic information
via mRNAs and proteins. However, both methods are inadequate
for elucidating the dynamic changes occurring during embryogenesis because they offer low resolution and are not robust enough.
Metabolomics is one of the latest ‘‘-omic” sciences, which is
based on the metabolome—an exhaustive proﬁle of metabolites
[3,4]. Thus far, metabolomics was typically applied for the determi-

* Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: shingo@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp (S. Maegawa), fukusaki@bio.eng.
osaka-u.ac.jp (E. Fukusaki).
0006-291X/$ - see front matter Ó 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.041

nation of unknown gene functions, in association with genomics,
transcriptomics, and/or proteomics. The most important independent application of metabolomics is the identiﬁcation of biomarkers in speciﬁc cell types or tissues [5,6]. The identiﬁed biomarkers
can be indirectly used for elucidating disease mechanisms, diagnostic targets, etc. [4,6,7]. In principle, the metabolome, particularly the unbiased metabolome, would be more diverse and
dynamic in terms of chemical and physical properties of metabolites than the transcriptome and proteome. Therefore, the analysis
of the metabolome would be suitable for describing the dynamic
changes that occur during embryogenesis. However, there have
been no reports on the practical application of metabolomics for
determining the mechanisms underlying speciﬁc biological processes in higher organisms.
In the present study, we attempted to use metabolomics instead
of transcriptomics and proteomics for understanding the mechanisms underlying complicated biological processes occurring during embryogenesis in zebraﬁsh. Metabolites are known to play
an important role during early development. For instance, retinoic
acid is a key metabolite involved in many developmental processes
such as neural differentiation and patterning [8]. In addition, several studies on glucose and lipid metabolism have revealed that
alterations in the levels or types of metabolites affect embryonic
development and/or cell fate determination [9,10]. Therefore, early
embryogenesis was a suitable period for determining whether
metabolomics can be used to understand complex biological

S. Hayashi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 386 (2009) 268–272

processes. We ﬁrst identiﬁed and proﬁled 63 types of metabolites
from 24 developmental stages, i.e., from 1-cell stage to 48 h postfertilization (hpf), of zebraﬁsh embryos by using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) method [11]. Analysis of the GC/
MS data with partial least square (PLS) regression clearly indicated
a good correlation between metabolomes and developmental
stages. Next, we developed a model for predicting embryonic
stages on the basis of the metabolome. Our novel model is a practical tool to analyze the biological processes in early development.
Materials and methods
Maintenance of zebraﬁsh. Danio rerio adults were obtained from
a local pet shop and maintained under the following conditions: at
28.0 ± 0.5 °C and a 14-h/10-h light/dark cycle. They were fed a
commercially available artiﬁcial diet (TetraMinTM ﬂakes) twice
daily.
Embryo collection. Fertilized eggs were collected immediately
after spawning, and the embryos were washed several times in
system water, maintained at 28.5 °C in the same water, and staged
by hpf according to the standard morphological criteria. Embryos
were collected at 24 time points (1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16,
18, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32, 34, 36, 39, 42, 45, and 48 hpf), immediately frozen using liquid nitrogen, and stored at 80 °C. The 24
time points were classiﬁed into the following developmental
stages: cleavage period (1 and 2 hpf), blastula period (3 and

269

4 hpf), gastrula period (6–10 hpf), segmentation period
(12–24 hpf), and pharyngula period (26–48 hpf).
Sample preparation. For GC analysis, we collected 50 embryos at
each time point. We mixed 1000 ll of 80% methanol diluted in
water with 30 ll of 0.2 mg/ml solution of ribitol and used it as
an internal standard. The embryos were homogenized with MM
301 mixer mills (Retsch GmbH & Co., KG, Haan, Germany). The
homogenate was shaken for 30 min at 37 °C and centrifuged at
16,000 g for 3 min at 4 °C. An 800-ll aliquot of the supernatant
was transferred to an Eppendorf tube with a pierced cap. The
samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge dryer. For derivatization, 50 ll of methoxylamine hydrochloride in pyridine (10 mg/
ml)—the ﬁrst derivatizing agent—was added to the samples. The
mixture was incubated at 30 °C for 90 min. The second derivatizing
agent, i.e., 50 ll N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)triﬂuoroacetamide
(MSTFA), was added, and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for
30 min. A 1-ll sample was injected in the split mode (10:1, v/v).
GC/MS analysis. Chromatography was performed on the 6890 N
system (Agilent Co., Palo Alto, CA) equipped with a fused-silica
capillary column (internal diameter (i.d.), 30 m  0.25 mm) coated
with a CP-SIL 8 CB low bleed ﬁlm (thickness, 0.25 lm; Varian Inc.,
Palo Alto, CA) and was connected to a Pegasus III TOF mass spectrometer (LECO, St. Joseph, MI) equipped with an autosampler
7683B series injector (Agilent Co., Palo Alto, CA). The injection
temperature was 230 °C. The helium gas ﬂow rate through the
column was 1 ml/min. The column temperature was isothermally

Fig. 1. Paradigm of our novel method developed to understand the dynamic changes involved in early vertebrate development by using metabolic proﬁling. We believe that
alterations in the quality and/or quantity of metabolites reﬂect the dynamic changes in cell fate and pattern in an embryo during early development. Here, we proﬁled the
metabolomes for each developmental stage by using GC/TOF-MS, as described in the text. Multivariate analysis of the metabolome data indicated that metabolic changes
reﬂected progress in embryonic development, suggesting that biological processes can be analyzed and predicted.

270

S. Hayashi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 386 (2009) 268–272

maintained at 80 °C for 2 min and then raised to 330 °C at the rate
of 15 °C/min; the temperature was isothermally maintained at
330 °C for 6 min. The temperatures of the transfer line and the
ion source were 250 °C and 200 °C, respectively. Ions were generated at an electron impact (EI) energy of 70 kV, and 20 scans/s were
recorded over the mass range of 85–500 m/z. The acceleration voltage was applied after a 245 s solvent delay.
Data processing and multivariate analysis. For processing GC data,
raw chromatographic data (Pegasus ﬁle, *.peg) were converted into
ANDI ﬁles (Analytical Data Interchange Protocol, *.cdf). The ANDI
formatted data could be converted and transferred between different mass spectral equipments. The spectral intensity of each compound was determined after detecting the peaks by using the
MZmine software program [13]. The software had an in-built Centroid peak detector tool and the parameter settings for the same
were as follows: the m/z bin size was set to 1.0; the chromatographic threshold level, to 0%; the noise level, to 5; the minimum
peak height, to 50; the minimum peak duration, to 0.5; the tolerance for m/z variation, to 0.5; and the tolerance for intensity variation, to 10%. The distinctive m/z peak for each compound was
normalized on the basis of the ribitol peak intensity. Each metabolite was identiﬁed on the basis of an in-house chemical library,
and then each intensity of same compound was multiplied by
100. Those m/z peaks were selected as distinctive m/z peaks in
the mass spectrogram whose intensities were not affected by
neighboring peaks (Supplementary Table 1). PCA was initially
applied to understand the relationships among the various groups
of multivariate data in terms of similarities or differences. The
commercially available Pirouette software (Informetrix, Inc.) was
used for this purpose. The projections to latent structures by
means of partial least square (PLS) (SIMCA-P version 11.0; Umetrics, Umeå, Sweden) were used to validate the data and create a
prediction model. PLS determines the association between two sets
of variables: observations and responses.
Results
The metabolome analysis reﬂects dynamic changes in zebraﬁsh
embryogenesis
Zebraﬁsh was chosen as the model animal because it has several
advantages [12]. First, we separated the metabolites from 24 differ-

ent developmental stages of zebraﬁsh by using the GC/MS system
(Fig. 1). Data thus obtained were preprocessed using the MZmine
software [13]. The data were normalized using an internal standard,
and each metabolite was identiﬁed on the basis of an in-house chemical library. The integral amount of each metabolite was set to 100
(see Supplementary Table 1). The results of the GC/MS analysis
revealed that the quantity and type of metabolites were considerably altered during early development (Supplementary Table 1). In
order to identify the entire spectrum of metabolic changes occurring
during early development, the abovementioned data were examined by principle component analysis (PCA) (Fig. 1). Currently, PCA
is one of the most useful methods for exploratory multivariate analysis and enables the analysis of the internal structure of the data by
decreasing the dimensions of the data matrix (Supplementary Figure
1). Because of its advantages, PCA was used to process the metabolome data obtained from each developmental stage. The PCA score plot
of factor 1 (eigenvector), which showed the highest contribution
(69.4%), clearly revealed a positive separation among metabolite
groups corresponding to each developmental stage (Fig. 2A). The
data for the majority of the metabolites showed positive values in
loading plot 1, suggesting that the amount of most of the metabolites
increased as embryogenesis proceeded (Fig. 2B). The analysis of
factor 2, which showed a high contribution (5.8%) in the second component, revealed three clusters; this indicated different patterns of
alterations in the metabolite composition during development
(Fig. 2A). In fact, the three clusters corresponded to three developmental stages (i.e., from 1 to 8 hpf, from 10 to approximately
24 hpf, and from approximately 30 to 48 hpf); this suggested that
the composition of metabolites was considerably altered during zebraﬁsh embryogenesis. Therefore, we concluded that a composition
of the metabolome is a ‘‘ﬁngerprint” of each developmental stage,
indicating that dynamic alterations in metabolites coincide with
developmental processes.
Our model based on the metabolome obtained from each
developmental stage
Next, we attempted to study the relationship between the
metabolome and the developmental stage. Since we observed distinct metabolic proﬁles corresponding to each developmental
stage, we hypothesized that we could develop a model for predicting the developmental stage by using metabolomics. To validate

Fig. 2. Cluster of each metabolome during development. (A) Principle component analysis (PCA) revealed distinct metabolome clusters corresponding to each developmental
stage. The score plot was created using PCA. The number of spots at each point represents the hours after fertilization. (B) The loading plot was calculated on the basis of the
score plot. The loading plot indicates the impact of each metabolite on the results of the cluster analysis.

S. Hayashi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 386 (2009) 268–272

271

Fig. 3. A model constructed using partial least square (PLS) regression reveals a good correlation between the composition of the metabolome at a particular time and actual
embryogenesis. (A) Relationship between actual developmental stages and the metabolic ﬁngerprints. The model was constructed by using the entire gas chromatography
(GC) data and demonstrates an obvious correlation between the developmental stages and the metabolomes. Each panel shows a photograph of an embryo at a particular
developmental stage. (B) The prediction model including the training set. This model was calculated using the data for all developmental stages except the 8-, 16-, 24-, and
32-h post-fertilization (hpf) stages. (C) Cross-validation of the model. The data for the 8-, 16-, 24-, and 32-hpf stages were ﬁtted onto the prediction model presented in (B).
Blue circles correspond to the data for the 8-, 16-, 24-, and 32-hpf stages.

this hypothesis, we analyzed the data by projections to latent
structures using partial least square (PLS) regression. PLS is one
of the most reliable methods for the regression of multivariate data
[14] because decreasing the dimensions of the data matrix is
analogous to determining the principal components using PCA
(Supplementary Figure 2). We could construct a regression model
with high linearity because R2 was 0.98 (Fig. 3A). In order to determine the accuracy of our model, we excluded the data from 8-, 16-,
24-, and 32-hpf stages and used the remaining data as the training
set for PLS (Fig. 3B). For cross-validation, we used the data for
8-, 16-, 24-, and 32-hpf stages as the test set. The PLS results for
the training set revealed high linearity without the test set, and
the test set perfectly ﬁt into the predicted regression line
(Fig. 3C). Furthermore, there was no difference between the root
Table 1
Validated prediction model using partial least square (PLS) regression. RMSEE and
RMSEP are root mean square errors of the ﬁt for observations using the training set
and of the ﬁt of the prediction for observations using the test set, respectively.

Identiﬁed compounds
Entire data
Cross-validationa

Latent factors

R2Y

RMSEE

RMSEP

2
2

0.98
0.98

2.094
2.159

—
1.887

a
Test set were 8-, 16-, 24-, and 32-hpf samples, and the other samples were
included in the training set.

mean square error for the entire data set (RMSEE) and that for
the training data set (RMSEP) (Table 1). On the basis of these
results, we could ﬁnally conclude that our prediction model was
valid and that the linearity of our model was high enough to predict the developmental stages.
Discussion
In the present study, we attempted to use the metabolomics
approach for elucidating early developmental processes. The
results demonstrated a novel application of metabolomics in
understanding the embryogenesis in zebraﬁsh. With the progression of embryogenesis, the metabolome exhibited dynamic
changes, indicating that the types and/or quantities of metabolites
are correlated with the biological activities occurring during
development. On the basis of the good correlation between the
metabolome and embryogenesis, we concluded that the metabolome can be used as a ﬁngerprint of a particular developmental
process.
Thus far, several studies have attempted to analyze vertebrate
embryogenesis using the transcriptomic or the proteomic approach [15,16]. Although these approaches are partially useful in
elucidating the complex developmental processes, they cannot be
used for the complete representation of dynamic changes occurring during embryogenesis because of low resolution and poor

272

S. Hayashi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 386 (2009) 268–272

robustness. Here, we successfully demonstrated the dynamic
changes involved in early vertebrate development with sufﬁcient
accuracy and precision by using the metabolomic approach. Moreover, our results clearly indicated that the metabolomic approach
has sufﬁcient resolution and robustness to describe dynamic biological events and is a powerful tool to analyze early embryogenesis as well as other complicated biological processes. In the
previous studies conducted on zebraﬁsh as well as other vertebrates, morphology and gene expression patterns have been used
as phenotypic parameters to analyze developmental events and
mutants [17]. In addition to these traditional phenotypic parameters, metabolomics offers a new class of phenotypic parameters
for analyzing early developmental processes. Metabolomics approach will enable identiﬁcation of mutants exhibiting no visible
defects and clariﬁcation of novel aspects of known mutants. The
new phenotypic parameter—the metabolome—may reveal unknown genetic networks involved in early development.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research for Priority Areas (Life Surveyor). S.M. was supported by a
Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (Start-up) (No. 20870024).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.041.
References
[1] W.J.
Longabaugh,
E.H.
Davidson,
H.
Bolouri,
Computational
representation of developmental genetic regulatory networks, Dev. Biol
283 (2005) 1–16.

[2] A. Bachi, T. Bonaldi, Quantitative proteomics as a new piece of the systems
biology puzzle, J. Proteomics 71 (2008) 357–367.
[3] S.G. Oliver, M.K. Winson, D.B. Kell, F. Baganz, Systematic functional analysis of
the yeast genome, Trends Biotechnol. 16 (1998) 373–378.
[4] J.C. Lindon, E. Holmes, J.K. Nicholson, Metabonomics in pharmaceutical R&D,
FEBS J. 274 (2007) 1140–1151.
[5] J.K. Nicholson, J.C. Lindon, E. Holmes, ‘‘Metabonomics”: understanding the
metabolic responses of living systems to pathophysiological stimuli via
multivariate statistical analysis of biological NMR spectroscopic data,
Xenobiotica 29 (1999) 1181–1189.
[6] N. Kaplowitz, Idiosyncratic drug hepatotoxicity, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 4
(2005) 489–499.
[7] D.I. Ellis, W.B. Dunn, J.L. Grifﬁn, J.W. Allwood, R. Goodacre, Metabolic
ﬁngerprinting as a diagnostic tool, Pharmacogenomics 8 (2007) 1243–
1266.
[8] M. Maden, Retinoic acid in the development, regeneration and maintenance of
the nervous system, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8 (2007) 755–765.
[9] M. Barceló-Fimbres, G.E. Seidel Jr., Effects of either glucose or fructose and
metabolic regulators on bovine embryo development and lipid accumulation
in vitro, Mol. Reprod. Dev. 74 (2007) 1406–1418.
[10] R. Dumollard, Z. Ward, J. Carroll, M.R. Duchen, Regulation of redox metabolism
in the mouse oocyte and embryo, Development 134 (2007) 455–465.
[11] W. Pongsuwan, E. Fukusaki, T. Bamba, T. Yonetani, T. Yamahara, A. Kobayashi,
Prediction of Japanese green tea ranking by gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry-based hydrophilic metabolite ﬁngerprinting, J. Agric. Food
Chem. 55 (2007) 231–236.
[12] W. Driever, S. Dtemple, A. Schier, L. Solnica-Krezel, Zebraﬁsh: genetic tools for
studying vertebrate development, Trends Genet. 10 (1994) 152–159.
[13] M. Katajamaa, M. Oresic, Data processing for mass spectrometry-based
metabolomics, J. Chromatogr. A 1158 (2007) 318–328.
[14] L.P. Ammann, M. Merritt, A. Sagalowsky, P. Nurenberg, Peak-ﬁnding partial
least squares for the analysis of 1H NMR spectra, J. Chemometrics 20 (2006)
231–238.
[15] M.G. Katz-Jaffe, D.W. Linck, W.B. Schoolcraft, D.K. Gardner, A proteomic
analysis of mammalian preimplantation embryonic development,
Reproduction 130 (2005) 899–905.
[16] S. Mathavan, S.G. Lee, A. Mak, L.D. Miller, K.R. Murthy, K.R. Govindarajan, Y.
Tong, Y.L. Wu, S.H. Lam, H. Yang, Y. Ruan, V. Korzh, Z. Gong, E.T. Liu, T. Lufkin,
Transcriptome analysis of zebraﬁsh embryogenesis using microarrays, PLoS
Genet. 1 (2005) 260–276.
[17] T. Sakaguchi, A. Kuroiwa, H. Takeda, A novel sox gene, 226D7, acts
downstream of Nodal signaling to specify endoderm precursors in zebraﬁsh,
Development 107 (2001) 25–38.

