5
Derivatization Reactions and Reagents
for Gas Chromatography Analysis
Francis Orata
Masinde Muliro University of Science and Technology,
Kenya
1. Introduction
Derivatization reactions are meant to transform an analyte for detectability in Gas
Chromatography (GC) or other instrumental analytical methods. Derivatization in GC
analysis can be defined as a procedural technique that primarily modifies an analyte’s
functionality in order to enable chromatographic separations. A modified analyte in this
case will be the product, which is known as the derivative. The derivative may have similar
or closely related structure, but not the same as the original non-modified chemical
compound.
Volatility of sample is a requirement for GC analysis. Derivatization will render highly polar
materials to be sufficiently volatile so that they can be eluted at reasonable temperatures
without thermal decomposition (Knapp, 1979) or molecular re-arrangement (Kühnel et al.,
2007; Blau and King 1979). Understanding the chemistry of the analytes, derivatizing
reagents used in sample preparation, and the detailed functionality of Gas Chromatography
are important to get reliable results. For GC analysis, compounds containing functional
groups with active hydrogens such as -SH, -OH, -NH and -COOH are of primary concern
because of the tendency of these functional groups to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds
(Zaikin and Halket, 2003). These intermolecular hydrogen bonds affect the inherent
volatility of compounds containing them, their tendency to interact with column packing
materials and their thermal stability (Sobolevsky et al., 2003). Since GC is used to separate
volatile organic compounds, modification of the functional group of a molecule by
derivatization enables the analysis of compounds that otherwise can not be readily
monitored by GC. Derivatization process either increases or decreases the volatility of the
compound of interest. It also reduces analyte adsorption in the GC system and improves
detector response, peak separations and peak symmetry.
In addition to particular analytes such as pharmaceuticals, biomolecules such us organic
acids, amides, poly-hydroxy compounds, amino acids, pesticides and other persistent
organic compounds, new classes of compounds of interest for example fluorinated alkylated
substances and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons continue to emerge. It is necessary to
develop and/or improve on chemical analytical methods and hence the need to familiarize
with derivatization methods that are applicable to GG analysis. Generally derivatization is
aimed at improving on the following aspects in Gas Chromatography.

www.intechopen.com

84
i.

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

Suitability

Suitability is the form of compounds that is amenable to the analytical technique. For GC, it
is a requirement that the compound to be analyzed should be volatile with respect to gas
chromatographic analysis conditions, as compared to liquid chromatography (LC), where
the compound of interest should be soluble in the mobile phase. Therefore, derivatization
procedure modifies the chemical structure of the compounds so that they can be analyzed
by the desired technique.
ii.

Efficiency

Efficiency is the ability of the compound of interest to produce good peak resolution and
symmetry for easy identification and practicability in GC analysis. Interactions between the
compounds themselves or between the compounds and the GC column may reduce the
separation efficiency of many compounds s and mixtures (Knapp, 1979). Derivatization of
analyte molecules can reduce these interactions that interfere with analysis. Also,
compounds that co-elute or have poor resolution from other sample components during
separation in GC can frequently be resolved by an appropriate derivative.
iii. Detectability
Detectability is the outcome signal that emanates from the interaction between the analyte
and the GC detector. Increasing the amounts of materials will impact the range at which
they can be detected in Gas chromatography. This can be achieved either by increasing the
bulk of the compound or by introducing onto the analyte compound, atoms or functional
groups that interact strongly with the detector and hence improve signal identification. For
example the addition of halogen atoms to analyte molecules for electron capture detectors
(ECD) and the formation of trimethylsilyl (TMS) ether derivatives to produce readily
identifiable fragmentation patterns and mass ions (Knapp, 1979).
1.1 Derivatization reagent
Derivatization reagent is the substance that is used to chemically modify a compound to
produce a new compound which has properties that are suitable for analysis in GC or LC.
The following criteria must be used as guidelines in choosing a suitable derivatization
reagent for GC analysis.
i.
ii.

The reagent should produce more than 95 % complete derivatives.
It should not cause any rearrangements or structural alterations of compounds during
formation of the derivative.
iii. It should not contribute to loss of the sample during the reaction.
iv. It should produce a derivative that will not interact with the GC column.
v. It should produce a derivative that is stable with respect to time.
1.2 Objectives for derivatization
The following outlined objectives among others can be achieved by application of proper
derivatization procedures;
i.

Improvement of resolution and reduce tailing of polar compounds which may contain –
OH, –COOH, =NH, –NH2, –SH, and other functional groups.

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

ii.
iii.
iv.
v.

85

Analysis of relatively nonvolatile compounds.
Reduction of volatility of compounds prior to GC analysis.
Improvement of analytical efficiency and hence increase detectability.
Stabilization of compounds for GC analysis.

2. Types of derivatization reactions
Derivatization reactions used for gas chromatography (GC) fall into three general reaction
types namely; Alkylation of which the general process is esterification, Acylation and
Silylation. Through these three processes, highly polar materials such as organic acids,
amides, poly-hydroxy compounds, amino acids are rendered suitable for GC analysis by
making them sufficiently volatile. These general processes are discussed below.
2.1 Alkylation
Alkylation is mostly used as the first step for further derivatizations or as a method of
protection of certain active hydrogens in a sample molecule. It represents the replacement of
active hydrogen by an aliphatic or aliphatic-aromatic (e.g., benzyl) group in process referred
to as esterification. Equation 1 below shows the general reaction equation representing the
esterification process.
RCOOH + PhCH2X → RCOOCH2Ph + HX
Equation 1: General reaction for esterification process: X = halogen or alkyl group R, H =
another alkyl group R.
The principal chromatographic use of this reaction is the conversion of organic acids into
esters, especially methyl esters that produce better chromatograms than the free acids.
Alkylation reactions can also be used to prepare ethers, thioethers and thioesters, Nalkylamines, amides and sulphonamides (Danielson, 2000). In general, the products of
alkylation are less polar than the starting materials because active hydrogen has been
replaced by an alkyl group. The alkyl esters formed offer excellent stability and can be
isolated and stored for extended periods if necessary. In esterification an acid reacts with an
alcohol to form an ester. In the reaction, a catalyst more often an inorganic acid such as
hydrochloric acid or thionyl chloride (Zenkevich, 2009) is recommended for example, in the
trans-esterification of fats or oils (Sobolevsky et al., 2003).
2.1.1 Derivatization reagents used in alkylation
Common derivatization reagents for the Alkylation type of reactions are Dialkylacetals,
Diazoalkales, Pentafluorobenzyl bromide (PFBBr), Benzylbromide, Boron trifluoride (BF3) in
methanol or butanol and Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBH) among others. Alkylation
reagents can be used alone to form esters, ethers and amides or they can be used in
conjunction with acylation or silylation reagents. The reaction conditions can vary from
strongly acidic to strongly basic with both generating stable derivatives. However, it must
be noted that the reagents are more limited to amines and acidic hydroxyls and that the
reaction conditions are frequently severe while the reagents are often toxic. Some
derivatization reagents and their respective derivatization procedures in alkylation reactions
are discussed below.

www.intechopen.com

86

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

2.1.1.1 Dialkylacetals
Dimethylformamide (DMF) is an example of dialkylacetals with a general formula
CH3CH3NCHOROR are used to esterify acids to their methyl esters. Dialkylacetals have a
wider applicability for the derivatization of a number of functional groups containing
reactive hydrogens. Because the principal reaction product is dialkylacetals (DMF), the
isolation of the derivative is not required and the reaction mixture can be injected directly
into the gas chromatograph (Regis, 1999). This reagent is an excellent first choice for
derivatization of a compound for which there is no published method available. The
reaction between N, N-dimethylformamide dimethylacetal and Carboxylic acid is as follows
(Equation 2).
CH3CH3NCHOROR + R`COOH → R`COOR + ROH + CH3CH3NCHO
Equation 2: The reaction between N, N-dimethylformamide dimethylacetal and Carboxylic
acid.
Although carboxylic acids, phenols, and thiols react quickly with DMF, to give the
corresponding alkyl derivatives, hydroxyl groups are not readily methylated. During
derivatization procedure, care should be taken because N, N-dimethylformamide
dimethylacetals are moisture sensitive. The reagents work quickly with derivatization
taking place just upon dissolution. The reaction is suitable for flash alkylation, where
derivatization takes place in the injection port. Since adjustment of polarity and volatility of
the sample is possible, this can allow change of retention time. It is worth noting that the
reagents will react with water to give the corresponding alcohol though traces of water will
not affect the reaction as long as you have an excess of the acid.
A rapid procedure for the derivatization of both carboxylic and amino acids using DMFDialkylacetal reagents is by dissolving the sample in 0.5 mL of a 1:1 solvent of choice/
reagent mixture by heating to 100 °C. For example, it is advisable to use pyridine for fatty
acids, acetonitrile for amino acids as solvent of choice (Thenot and Horning, (1972).
Alternative method comprises of combining 50 mg fatty acid and 1 ml DMF in a reaction
vial. Cap the vial and heat at 60 °C for 10 - 15 minutes or until dissolution is complete and
analyze the cooled sample in gas chromatography (Thenot et al., 1972).
2.1.1.2 Diazoalkales
The main reagent in the diazoalkales group is diazomethane. Diazomethane (N2CH2) is the
quickest and cleanest method available for the preparation of analytical quantities of methyl
esters. The reaction of diazomethane with a carboxylic acid is quantitative and essentially
instantaneous in ether solutions. In the presence of a small amount of methanol as catalyst,
diazomethane reacts rapidly with fatty acids, forming methyl esters. Elimination of gaseous
nitrogen drives the reaction forward. The reaction for the conversion of carboxylic acids to
methyl esters (Equation 3) is outlined below:
RCOOH + -CH2N+N → RCOOCH3 + N2
Equation 3: The reaction for the conversion of carboxylic acids to methyl esters
The yield is high and side reactions are minimal. Sample sizes of 100 - 500 µl are easily
derivatized and the isolation of the methyl esters is simple and quantitative when dealing

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

87

with acids having chain lengths from C8 to C24. However, care should be taken in handling
diazomethane because it is carcinogenic, highly toxic, and potentially explosive.
2.1.1.3 Pentafluorobenzyl bromide (PFBBr) and Pentafluorobenzyl-hydroxylamine
hydrochloride (PFBHA)
Pentafluorobenzyl bromide (C7H2F5Br) and also Pentafluorobenzyl-hydroxylamine
hydrochloride can be used to esterify phenols, thiols, and carboxylic acids. Equation 4 below
is an example for PFBBr derivatization process.
R`OR + C7H2F5Br → R`OC7H2F5 + RBr
Equation 4: Reaction of PFBBr with either phenols, thiols or carboxylic acids: R = Hydrogen
Derivatization can be done with O-(2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorobenzyl)-hydroxylamine
hydrochloride (PFBHA) for carbonyls and pentafluorobenzyl bromide (PFBBr) for
carboxylic acid and phenol groups for gas (GC/MS) in an electron impact mode (EI) and a
gas chromatograph/ion trap mass spectrometry (GC/ITMS) in both chemical impact and EI
modes. To confirm different isomers, the PFBHA-derivatives of analytes can be
rederivatized by silylation using N, O-bis (trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) (Jang
and Kamens, 2001).
Example for the application of this method is from the work of Allmyr et al., (2006) where
the analysis of Triclosan in human plasma and milk was accomplished by the conversion of
Triclosan into its pentafluorobenzyl ester by adding 2 ml of H2O (Milli-Q), 50 μl of 2M KOH,
10 μl pentafluorobenzyl chloride in 10% toluene and 0.3 g NaCl (more sodium chloride was
added if emulsion formed upon mixing) to the sample extract and shaking the tube
vigorously for 2 minutes. This was followed by extraction of the aqueous phase with 2 ml of
n-hexane. Then, 3 ml of 98 % H2SO4 was added to the extract, and the tube inverted 60 times
and another extraction using 2 ml of n-hexane followed. The final extract was reduced to 2
ml under a gentle stream of nitrogen gas at room temperature. Approximately 0.5 ml of the
extract was injected to GC for analysis.
i.

Organic Acids derivatisation

The following procedure by Chien et al., (1998) and Galceran et al., (1995) is a variation of
methods previously utilized for organic acid and phenol analysis. In the method, sample
extracts for organic acid/phenol derivatization are first dried by passing a gentle stream of
nitrogen in the sample. Once the solvent has been evaporated, acetone is added to bring each
sample to a volume of 500 µL. Each sample is added 20 µL of 10% PFBBr solution and 50 µL of
1,4,7,10,13,16-hexaoxacyclooctadecane [C2H4O]6 (18-crown-6 ether solution), both in acetone.
Approximately 10 mg of potassium is added to each extract, and the extracts are capped and
sonicated for three hours. Upon completion of sonication the acetone is evaporated by passing
a gentle stream of nitrogen, and the residue dissolved into hexane for GC analysis.
Equation 5 below shows the chemical reactions for the conversion of organic acids and
phenols into their pentafluorobenzyl esters and ether respectively using pentafluorobenzyl
bromide (PFBBr) derivatization.
i.

www.intechopen.com

ROCOH + C7H2F5Br 
 C7H2F5OCOR + HBr
18  c  6 ether
K 2 CO 3

88

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

ii.

K 2 CO 3
PhOH + C7H2F5Br 
 C7H2F5OPh + HBr
18  c  6 ether

Equation 5: Reactions for the conversion of organic acids and phenols into their
pentafluorobenzyl esters (i) and ether (ii) respectively using pentafluorobenzyl bromide
(PFBBr).
In another example of pentafluorobenzylation procedure (Naritisin and Markey, 1996 &
Kawahara, 1968), 20 μl of PFBBr is added to the vial containing already extracted and
cleaned sample in methyl chloride. The vial is then capped and shaken for 20 – 30 minutes.
Gas chromatography analysis can then be accomplished using either of the two methods
depending on the available detector. A portion of methylene chloride phase can be injected
into the chromatograph for FID analysis or it can be evaporated using a gentle stream of
nitrogen gas and re-dissolve in benzene for ECD analysis. Reagents containing fluorinated
benzoyl groups are good for ECD analysis.
ii.

Carbonyls

The derivatization process performed by Spaulding et al., (2003), Destaillats et al., (2001) &
Rao et al., (2001) for the analysis of carbonyl involves first, the reduction in volume of
sample extracts to < 50 µL under a gentle stream of nitrogen. Once the extract volume has
been reduced, a 9:1 (v/v) mixture of carbonyl-free Acetonitrile: Dichloromethane (DCM) is
added to bring the sample to a volume of 500 µL. This is followed by the addition of 50
mgmL-1 solution of O-(2, 3, 4, 5, 6-pentafluorobenzyl) hydroxylamine hydrochloride
(PFBHA) in methanol that will result to a target PFBHA concentration of 5 mM. The sample
is left at room temperature for a period of 24 hours then subsequently analyzed using GC.
The balanced chemical reaction where O-(2, 3, 4, 5, 6-pentafluorobenzyl) hydroxylamine
hydrochloride (PFBHA) is used for the conversion of carbonyls into their pentafluorobenzyl
oximes is provided below (Equation 6).
R´OCR´´ + C6F5-ONH2 → C6F5-ONR´CR´´ + Isomer(s) + H2O
Equation 6: Chemical reaction for the conversion of carbonyls into pentafluorobenzyl
oximes using O-(2, 3, 4, 5, 6-pentafluorobenzyl) hydroxylamine hydrochloride (PFBHA).
The PFBHA derivatization process for most of the carbonyl compounds could be completed
in 2 h at room temperature (Bao et al., 1998).
2.1.1.4 Benzylbromide
Benzyl bromide reacts with the acid part of an alkyl acid to form an ester, and therefore
increase the volatility of the analyte of interest. Orata et al., (2009) determined long chain
perfluorinated acids namely; perfluoro-n-octanoic acid (PFOA), 2H-perfluoro-2-octenoic
acid (FHUEA), 2H-perfluoro-2-decenoic acid (FOUEA) and 2H-perfluoro-2-dodecenoic acid
(FNUEA) in biota (fish) and abiota (water) by derivatization and subsequent analysis by
GC/MS. The method involved derivatization of long chain perfluorinated compounds using
benzyl bromide solution and acetone to form benzylperfluorooctanoate (benzyl ester) as
presented by the equation 7 below which shows the modification of perfluorooctanoic acid
to the respective ester.

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

89

CF3(CF2 )6COOH + C7H7Br → C15H7F15O2 + HBr
Equation 7: Convertion of Perfluorooctanoic acid to Benzylperfluorooctanoate using benzyl
bromide.
Long Chain Perfluorinated alkyl acids derivatization procedure by Orata et al (2009) is as
follows: Following extraction and sample clean up procedure, the sample is dried by a
gentle stream of nitrogen. The sample residue is then dissolved in 0.5 mL of acetone and 0.1
mL of benzyl bromide solution is added to it. The tube is heated at 80 °C for 15 min, cooled,
and evaporated to dryness with nitrogen. The residue is then dissolved in 1 mL of
methylene chloride for GC analysis. Results obtained in the study (Orata et al, 2009)
demonstrate that GC/MS can be an alternative to the LC/MS method for quantification of
perfluorinated acids in contaminated areas, where expected higher concentration of the
analyte is expected. It was in the view of the author (Orata et al, 2009) that the method can
be further improved to lower the detection limits.
2.1.1.5 Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBH)
Derivatization of a carboxylic acid with tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBH) forms butyl
ester, which will allow a longer retention times in a GC column (Lin et al., 2008). The reagent
is most commonly used for low molecular weight acids and is especially suitable for low
molecular weight amines (Regis, 1999). Equation 8 represents the derivatization reaction for
the conversion of carboxylic acid to alkyl esters using TBH.
[N (CH3)4]+[OH] – + RCOOH → RCOOC4H9
Equation 8: Conversion of carboxylic acid to alkyl esters using TBH.
The following derivatization procedure can be used for flash alkylation which is suitable for
biological fluids and thermally stable fatty acids analysis. Biological fluid or tissue is first
extracted using toluene. Then 4 mL of the extract is transferred into a nipple tube and
evaporate under a gentle stream of nitrogen gas at 60 °C. 25 μL of TBH solution is added to
dissolve the residue. After 30 minutes, 4 μL of the dissolved residue is injected directly onto
the chromatograph. The injection port temperature is set at 260 °C or above in GC
instrument.
2.1.1.6 Boron trifluoride (BF3) in methanol or butanol
Boron trifluoride (BF3) in methanol or n-Butanol has a general formula is F3B: HO–CnH2n+1
where (n = 1 or 4). This reagent is convenient and inexpensive method for forming esters. It
is most commonly used to form methyl (butyl) ester by reacting it with acids, as shown by
the following general equation 9.
F3B: HO–CnH2n+1 + RCOOH → RCOOCnH2n+1
Equation 9: General equation for formation of alkyl esters using Boron trifluoride (BF3) as a
derivatization reagent.
Boron trifluoride reagent forms fluoroboron compounds by reaction with atmospheric
oxygen and methanol and therefore making it prone to instability (Christie 1993). Therefore,
it should always be stored at the refrigerator temperature discarded after a few months use.

www.intechopen.com

90

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

In a study by Lough (1964) were polyunsaturated fatty acids were analyzed, it was observed
that boron trifluoride-methanol will cleave the rings in cyclopropane fatty acids (commonly
encountered in microorganisms), and it causes cis-trans isomerization of double bonds in
conjugated fatty acids. In addition, it reacts with the antioxidant Butylated hydroxytolune
(BHT) to produce spurious peaks in chromatograms.
The following esterification procedure can be used in derivatization using Boron trifluoride.
To a 100 mg organic acid in a vial, 3 mL BF3 in methanol or BF3 in n-butanol is added and
heated to 60 °C for 5 to 10 minutes. Heating temperature and time may vary i.e. Ribeiro et al.,
(2009) used 90 °C for 10 minutes for the process. This is followed by cooling and transferring
the mixture to a separating funnel with 25 mL hexane. Further, the sample is washed 2 times
with saturated NaCl solution, and then dried over anhydrous Na2SO4. The solvent is
evaporated to concentrate the sample and lastly injected onto column for GC analysis.
2.2 Silylation
Silylation is the most prevalent derivatization method as it readily volatizes the sample and
therefore very suitable for non-volatile samples for GC analysis. Silylation is the
introduction of a silyl group into a molecule, usually in substitution for active hydrogen
such as dimethylsilyl [SiH(CH3)2], t-butyldimethylsilyl [Si (CH3)2C(CH3)3] and
chloromethyldimethylsilyl [SiCH2Cl(CH3)2]. Replacement of active hydrogen by a silyl
group reduces the polarity of the compound and reduces hydrogen bonding (Pierce, 1968).
Many hydroxyl and amino compounds regarded as nonvolatile or unstable at 200 – 300 °C
have been successfully analyzed in GC after silylation (Lin et al., 2008 & Chen et al., 2007).
The silylated derivatives are more volatile and more stable and thus yielding narrow and
symmetrical peaks (Kataoka, 2005).
2.2.1 Silylation reaction and mechanism
The silylation reaction is driven by a good leaving group, which means a leaving group with
a low basicity, ability to stabilize a negative charge in the transitional state, and little or no
back bonding between the leaving group and silicon atom (Knapp, 1979). The mechanism
involves the replacement of the active hydrogens (in -OH, -COOH, -NH, -NH2, and -SH
groups) with a trimethylsilyl group. Silylation then occurs through nucleophilic attack
(SN2), where the better the leaving group, the better the siliylation. This results to the
production of a bimolecular transition state (Kühnel et al., 2007) in the intermediate step of
reaction mechanism. The general reaction for the formation of trialkylsilyl derivatives is
shown by equation 10. The leaving group in the case of trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) is the
Cl atom.

Equation 10: General reaction mechanism for the formation of trialkylsilyl derivatives for
trimethylchlorosilane, X = Cl

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

91

In silylation derivatisation, care must be taken to ensure that both sample and solvents are
dry. Silyl reagents generally are moisture sensitive, and should be stored in tightly sealed
containers (Sobolevsky et al., 2003) and therefore the solvents used should be as pure and as
little as possible. This will eliminate excessive peaks and prevent a large solvent peak. In
silylation, pyridine is the most commonly used solvent. Although pyridine may produce
peak tailing, it is an acid scavenger and will drive the reaction forward. In many cases, the
need for a solvent is eliminated with silylating reagents. The completion of the
derivatization process in silylation is usually observed when a sample readily dissolves in
the reagent. According to Regis (1999) the ease of reactivity of the functional group toward
silylation follows the order:
Alcohol > Phenol > Carboxyl > Amine > Amide /hydroxyl
For alcohols, the order will be as follows:
Primary > Secondary > Tertiary
Many reagents will require heating that is not in excess of 60 °C for about 10 - 15 minutes, to
prevent breakdown of the derivative. Although hindered products may require long term
heating.
2.2.2 Derivatization reagents used in Silylation
Reagents used for the silylation derivatization process include Hexamethyldisilzane
(HMDS),
Trimethylchlorosilane
(TMCS),
Trimethylsilylimidazole
(TMSI),
Bistrimethylsilylacetamide (BSA), Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (BSTFA), N-methyltrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (MSTFA), Trimethylsilyldiethylamine (TMS-DEA), Nmethyl-N-t-butyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
(MTBSTFA),
and
Halo-methylsilyl
derivatization reagents. Halo-methylsilyl derivatization reagents which although not
discussed in this chapter can produce both silylated and halogenated derivatives for ECD.
Silyl reagents will react with both alcohols and acids to form trimethylsilyl ethers and
trimethylsilyl esters respectively. These derivatives formed are volatile and for the most
part, are easily separated (Scott, 2003). Silyl reagents are compatible with most detection
systems but, if they are used in excess, they can cause difficulties with flame ionization
detectors (FID) (Sobolevsky et al, 2003). Silyl reagents are influenced by both the solvent
system and the addition of a catalyst. A catalyst (e.g., trimethylchlorosilane or pyridine)
increases the reactivity of the reagent.
Reagents that introduce a t-butyldimethylsilyl group in place of the trimethylsilyl group
were developed to impart greater hydrolytic stability to the derivatives. These tbutyldimethylsilyl derivatives not only have improved stability against hydrolysis, but
they also have the added advantage of distinctive fragmentation patterns, which makes
them useful in a variety of GC/MS applications. Most trimethylsilyl and tbutyldimethylsilyl derivatives have excellent thermal stability and are amenable to a wide
range of injection and column conditions (Pierce 2004). Silylation gives ability to
derivatize a wide variety of compounds for GC analysis. In addition a large number of
silylating reagents available.

www.intechopen.com

92

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

2.2.2.1 Bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide (BSA)
Bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide (BSA) was the first widely used silylating reagent. The
strength of BSA as a strong silylating reagent is enhanced more because acetamide is a good
leaving group. BSA reacts under mild conditions and produces relatively stable byproducts. However, the by-product which is trimethylsilyl -acetamide sometimes produces
peaks that overlap those of other volatile derivatives as shown in the equation 11 below.

Equation 11: Equation showing the by-product which is trimethylsilyl –acetamide from
Bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide silylation reagent: TMS = Si(CH3)3, Y = O, S, NH, NR`, COO,
R, R` = Alk, Ar.
BSA forms highly stable trimethylsilyl derivatives with most organic functional groups
under mild reaction conditions but their mixtures also oxidize to form silicon dioxide, which
can foul FID detectors. Experimentally, BSA has been found to be very efficient and only a
small amount of reagent is required. Moreso the derivatization process takes a shorter time
at room temperature. Saraji and Mirmahdieh, (2009) studied the influence of different
parameters on the in-syringe derivatization process using BSA were three parameters, the
amount of the BSA, the reaction time and the reaction temperature were investigated to
achieve the highest derivatization reaction yield. The results showed that 0.2 µL volume of
BSA derivatization reagent is enough to obtain the maximum derivatization reaction yield
for all compounds in 2 min time at room temperature.
2.2.2.2 Bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA)
N, N–bis(trimethyl–silyl)trifluoro-acetamide (BSTFA) just like bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide
(BSA) are the two most popular reagents for Silylation type of derivatization. They react
rapidly with organic acids to give high yields. Gerhke, (1968) developed a method in which
a few milligram of an acid is placed in a vial and about 50 µl of BSA or BSTFA is added to it.
The reaction can be expected to be complete directly within the solution, but the mixture can
also be heated for 5 to 10 min. at 60 °C to ensure that reaction is really complete, before GC
analysis. BSTFA reacts faster (as shown using the reaction 12 below) and more completely
than BSA, due to presence of trifluoroacetyl group.

Equation 12: Silylation reaction using N, N–bis(tri methyl–silyl)trifluoro-acetamide: TMS =
Si(CH3)3, Y = O, S, NH, NR`, COO, R, R` = Alk, Ar.
The high volatility of BSTFA and its byproducts results in separation of early eluting peaks.
In addition, its stable products result in low detector noise and fouling. Addition of

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

93

trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) catalyzes reactions of hindered functional groups in
secondary alcohols and amines.
In the method used by Schauer et al., (2002), sample extracts for analysis of hydroxylated
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (Hydroxy-PAHs), the sample extracts are first reduced in
volume to 200 µL under a gentle stream of nitrogen. To each sample 20 µL of freshly
prepared solution of 10% (v/v) Trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) in N-O-bis (trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) is added. The samples are capped, wrapped with Teflon tape,
and heated at 45 °C for 24 hours to convert the targeted analytes to their trimethylsilyl
derivatives. The balanced reaction (Equation 13) for this conversion to trimethyl silyl (TMS)
ethers using N-O-bis (trimethylsilyl)-trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) is provided in below.

Equation 13: Derivatization of Hydroxylated polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (HydroxyPAHs) into trimethyl silyl (TMS) ethers using BSTFA.
Caution must be exercised to prevent any water from entering the samples as this will lead
to hydrolysis of the BSTFA reagent and prevent any of the targeted analytes from
undergoing derivatization.
Szyrwińska et al., (2007) and Kuo and Ding, (2004) used N, O-bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) containing 1% trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS),
and bromoacetonitrile (BAN) reagents to analyze standard solutions of Bisphenol-A (BPA)
and extracts of powdered milk.
The method was by derivatization using Trimethylsilylation with the derivatizing reagent
which was BSTFA + 1% TMCS. Bisphenol-A standard solution (200 μL) was placed in a vial
(1 mL) and evaporated to dryness under a gentle stream of nitrogen at 60 °C. Silylating
agent (BSTFA containing 1 % TMCS; 100 μL) was added to the residue and the vial was
vortex mixed and heated at 80 °C for 30 min. After cooling, the derivatized solution was
evaporated to dryness and the residue was re-dissolved in 100 μL chloroform. This solution
(1 μL) was analyzed by GC–MS.
2.2.2.3 N-methyl-trimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (MSTFA)
N-methyl-trimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (MSTFA) is the most volatile of the trimethylsilyl
acetamides. It is most useful for the analysis of volatile trace materials where the derivatives
may be near the reagent or by-product peak. The general equation of the reaction (Equation
14) using MSTFA is shown below;

Equation 14: Silylation reaction using N-methyl-trimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (MSTFA):
TMS = Si(CH3)3, Y = O, S, NH, NR`, COO, R, R` = Alk, Ar.

www.intechopen.com

94

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

Silylation derivatization procedures by Butts, (1972) using BSTFA, BSA, or MSTFA formed
the basis for derivatisation application that was used to analyze over 200 organic
compounds including carboxylic acids, amines, alcohols, phenols, and nucleic acids. The
basis of the procedure is as follows: to a 1 - 5 mg sample, 100 μL each of pyridine as a
solvent and silylating reagent are added. The mixture is capped and heated to 60 °C for 20
minutes. For moderately hindered or slowly reacting compounds, BSTFA is recommended
for use with 1 or 10 % TMCS catalyst. Under extreme conditions compounds may require
heating for up to 16 hours. When Ketones are derivatized using this procedure, they may
form 15 – 20 % enol trimethylsilyl esters. The esters can be eliminated by first forming a
methoxime. In the case of Amino acids the reaction may be required to be in a sealed tube or
vial (Butts, 1972). The samples are heated cautiously, near the boiling point of the mixture
until a clear solution is obtained.
2.2.2.4 Hexamethyldisilzane (HMDS)
Hexamethyldisilzane (HMDS) is a weak donor, as it has symmetry. If it is used for
derivatization, it will attack only easily silylated hydroxyl groups. Equation 15 shows the
reaction using hexamethyldisilzane.

Equation 15: Silylation reaction using Hexamethyldisilzane (HMDS): Y = O, S, NH, NR`,
COO, R, R` = Alk, Ar.
Hexamethyldisilzane is a weak TMS donor that can be used for silylation of carbohydrates.
It can be used as mixture with pyridine and trifluoroacetic acid. The derivatization
procedure is simple as shown in this procedure where 2 ml of hexamethyldisilazane, 2 ml of
pyridine and 175 μL of trifluoroacetic acid are added to the samples. Silylation is then
performed at 60 °C for 1 hour.
2.2.2.5 Trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS)
Trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) is also a weak donor. In addition, it produces hydrochloric
acid as a by product with is acidic. It is therefore not commonly used. However, it is often
found as a catalyst to increase TMS donor potential. An example of derivatization reaction
using Trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) is shown in equation 16.

Equation 16: Silylation reaction using Trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS): Y = O, S, NH, NR`,
COO, R, R` = Alk, Ar.

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

95

2.2.2.6 Trimethylsilylimidazole (TMSI)
Trimethylsilylimidazole (TMSI) is not a weak donor, but it is selective as it reacts with
alcohols and phenols but not amines or amides (nitrogen groups). Since it is selective, it will
target the hydroxyls in wet sugars and also derivatize the acid sites of amino acids. It will
leave the amino group free for fluorinated derivatization. An example of reaction equation
using TMSI is shown below (Equation 17).

Equation 17: Silylation reaction using Trimethylsilylimidazole (TMSI): TMS = R, R` = Alk,
Ar.
The derivatives produced are suitable for ECD analysis. Isoherranen and Soback, (2000)
used the following derivatization procedure for the determination of Gentamicin. In the
procedure, the sample solution was evaporated to dryness under a stream of nitrogen in an
auto sampler vial and the dry residue was dissolved in 50 ml of anhydrous pyridine. To the
pyridine solution, 100 ml of TMSI were added and the vial was closed and incubated for 15
min at 60 °C. Thereafter, 70 ml of Trifluoroacetic anhydride (TFAA) were added and the vial
was closed and incubated for 60 min at 60 °C.
2.2.2.7 Trimethylsilyldiethylamine (TMS-DEA)
Trimethylsilyldiethylamine (TMS-DEA) reagent is used for derivatizing amino acids,
antibiotics, urea-formaldehyde condensates, steroids and carboxylic acids and it also targets
hindered compounds. Hydrolysis of TMS derivatives and reagents produces
hexamethyldisiloxane [(CH3)3SiOSi(CH3)]. Hexamethyldisiloxane is quite inert and does not
interfere in the reaction or produce byproducts with the sample. The reaction by product
diethylamine is very volatile and the reaction can be driven to completion by evaporating
the diethylamine produced. Equation 18 shows the derivatisation reaction using TMS-DEA
reagent.
TMS-N (C2H5)2+ H-Y-R → TMS-Y-R + H-N (C2H5)2
Equation 18: Silylation reaction using Trimethylsilyldiethylamine (TMS-DEA) reagent: TMS
= Si(CH3)3, Y = O, S, NH, NR`, COO, R, R` = Alk, Ar.
Because of its high volatility, it is eluted with the solvent or reagent and usually does not
interfere with the chromatogram.
2.2.2.8 N-methyl-N-t-butyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide (MTBSTFA)
Silylation
derivatisaion
using
N-methyl-N-t-butyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
(MTBSTFA) replaces the active hydrogen with tert-Butyldimethylsilyl (t-BDMS) group. The
tert-Butyldimethylsilyl derivatives which are more resistant to hydrolysis and can be up to
10,000
times
more
stable
than
TMS
derivatives.
N-methyl-N-tbutyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide will target sulfonic and phosphoric groups if present

www.intechopen.com

96

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

and it is suitable for GC with Mass spectroscopy detector as it produces easily interpreted
mass spectra. A typical (shown as equation 19) reaction involving MTBSTFA as the
derivatization reagent is shown below.

Equation 19: Silylation reaction using N-methyl-N-t-butyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
(MTBSTFA) reagent: Y = O, S, NH, NR`, COO, R, R` = Alk, Ar.
Silylation derivatization procedure using MTBSTFA can be carried out in the laboratory as
follows. To a 1 - 5 mg sample, 100 μL each of reagent and solvent is added and shaken on a
vortex mixture for five minutes. In case of hindered compounds, they should be heated in a
closed vial at 60 °C for 1 hour. For alcohols and amines, MTBSTFA with 1 % tert-butyl
dimethylchlorosilane (t-BDMCS) catalyst is used.
In another method where dicarboxylic acids are produced, 150 μL of sample, 100 μL of
acetonitrile and 10 uL of MTBSTFA are added. The vial is sealed and the mixture is allowed
to stand overnight. Then 100 μL of water is added to hydrolyze any unreacted MTBSTFA,
followed with 250 μL of hexane. Vortex mixing and centrifuging follows before the upper
hexane layer is decanted and dried to approximately 5 μL under a gentle stream of nitrogen.
The sample is finally injected onto GC column for analysis.
2.3 Acylation
Derivatization by acylation is a type of reaction in which an acyl group is introduced to an
organic compound. In the case of a carboxylic acid, the reaction involves the introduction of
the acyl group and the loss of the hydroxyl group. Compounds that contain active
hydrogens (e.g., -OH, -SH and -NH) can be converted into esters, thioesters and amides,
respectively, through acylation (Zenkevich, 2009). Acylation is also a popular reaction for
the production of volatile derivatives of highly polar and in volatile organic materials
(Zaikin and Halket, 2003). Acylation also improves the stability of those compounds that are
thermally labile by inserting protecting groups into the molecule. Acylation can render
extremely polar materials such as sugars amenable to separation by GC and, consequently,
are a useful alternative or complimentary to the silylation. Equation 20 shows an example of
an acylation is the reaction between acetic anhydride and an alcohol.
H  Catalyst 
CH3OCOCOCH3 + HOR 
 CH3OCOR´ + HOCOCH3

Equation 20: Reaction between acetic anhydride and an alcohol to produce acetate ester and
acetic acid. (Blau and Halket, 1993).
Acylation has the following benefits in GC analysis.
i.
ii.

It improves analyte stability by protecting unstable groups.
It can provide volatility on substances such as carbohydrates or amino acids, which
have many polar groups that they are nonvolatile and normally decompose on heating.

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

97

iii. It assists in chromatographic separations which might not be possible with compounds
that are not suitable for GC analysis.
iv. Compounds are detectable at very low levels with an electron capture detector (ECD).
In addition, acyl derivatives tend to produce fragmentation patterns of compounds in MS
applications which are clear to interpret and provide useful information on the structure of
these materials. Acylation can be used as a first step to activate carboxylic acids prior to
esterfication. However, acylation derivatives can be difficult to prepare especially because of
interference of other reaction products (acid by-products) which need to be removed before
GC separation. Acylation reagents are moisture sensitive, hazardous and odorous.
2.3.1 Derivatization reagents used in acylation
Common reagents for the Alkylation process are Fluoracylimidazoles, Fluorinated
Anhydrides, N-Methyl-bis(trifluoroacetamide) (MBTFA), Pentafluorobenzoyl Chloride
(PFBCI) and Pentafluoropropanol (PFPOH). Acylating reagents readily target highly polar,
multi-functional compounds, such as carbohydrates and amino acids. In addition, acylating
reagents offer the distinct advantage of introducing electron-capturing groups (Kataoka,
2005), and therefore enhancing detectability during analysis. These reagents are available as
acid anhydrides, acyl derivatives, or acyl halides. The acyl halides and acyl derivatives are
highly reactive and may be suited for use where issues of steric hindrance may be a factor.
Acid anhydrides are available in a number of fluorinated configurations, which can improve
detection. These fluorinated anhydride derivatives are used primarily for electron capture
detection (ECD), but can also be used for flame ionization detection (FID). Fluorinated
anhydrides are often used in derivatizing samples to confirm drugs of abuse. Despite this
special use, their acidic nature requires that any excess or byproducts be removed prior to
GC analysis to prevent deterioration of the column. Because of the acidic byproducts, the
derivatization process has been carried out in pyridine, tetrahydrofuran or another solvent
capable of accepting the acid by-product.
2.3.1.1 Fluorinated anhydrides
Fluorinated Anhydrides include the following compounds; Trifluoroacetoic Anhydride
(TFAA), Pentafluoropropionic Anhydride (PFPA) and Heptafluorobutyric Anhydride
(HFBA) which are suitable for both Flame ionization Detectors (FID) and Electron Capture
Detectors (ECD). Equations i, ii, and iii representing acylation reactions using HFBA, PFPA
and TFAA derivatization reagents respectively are shown below (Equation 21).
i.
ii.
iii.

C3F7OCOCOC3F7 + H-Y-R → C3F7OC-Y-R + C3F7OC-OH
C2F5OCOCOC2F5 + H-Y-R → C2F5OC-Y-R + C2F5OC-OH
CF3OCOCOCF3 + H-Y-R → CF3OC-Y-R + CF3OC-OH

Equation 21: Derivatization reactions using HFBA, PFPA and TFAA respectively: Y = O,
NH, NR´, R, R´ = Alk, Ar.
The perfluoroacid anhydrides and acyl halide reagents react to form acidic byproducts
which must be removed prior to the GC analysis in order to prevent damage to the

www.intechopen.com

98

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

chromatography column. The reagents basically react with alcohols, amines, and phenols to
produce stable and highly volatile derivatives. Bases, such as triethylamine, can be added as
an acid receptor and promote reactivity (Lin et al., 2008). Amine bases also may be used as
catalysts/acid acceptors.
The following procedure by Palmer et al., (2000) for derivatization using Fluorinated
Anhydrides involves the use of Triethylamine (TMA), as a catalyst. In a 5 mL vial, 50 μg (or
250 μg in case of FID) of sample is dissolve in 0.5 mL benzene. Then, 0.1 mL of 0.05 M
triethylamine in benzene is added followed by 10 μL of desired anhydride such as
heptafluorobutyric Anhydride (HFBA). The vial is capped and heat to 50 °C for 15 minutes.
This is followed by cooling and addition of 1 mL of a 5 % aqueous ammonia solution. The
cool mixture is shaken for 5 minutes, to separate the benzene layer, and injected directly
onto the GC column.
2.3.1.2 Fluoracylimidazoles
Fluoracylimidazoles include Trifluoroacetylimidazole (TFAI), Pentafluoropropanylimidazole
(PFPI) and Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole (HFBI) which reacts under mild conditions. The byproducts (imidazole and/or N-methytrifluoroacetamide) are not acidic and therefore do not
harm the column. Care must be taken because these reagents react violently with water.
Fluoracylimidazoles work best with amines and hydroxy compounds (Kataoka, 2005). For
example Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole readily forms derivatives with phenols, alcohols and
amines (as shown in equation 22) and the derivatives are suitable for ECD.

NOCC3F7 + H-Y-R
N

C3F7OC-Y-R +

NH
N

Equation 22: Derivatization reaction using Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole: Y = O, NH, NR´, R,
R´ = Alk, Ar.
The following procedure can be used for the derivatization of alcohols, amines, amides, and
phenols with imidazoles. To 1- 2 mg of sample in a vial, 2 mL toluene is added followed by
0.2 mL of imidazole (HFBI). The vial is capped and heat to 60 °C for 20 minutes. This is
followed by cooling the mixture and then washing it 3 times with 2 mL of H2O. The mixture
is then dried over MgSO4 and inject onto the GC for separation.
2.3.1.3 N-Methyl-bis(trifluoroacetamide) (MBTFA)
N-Methyl-bis(trifluoroacetamide) (MBTFA) reagent reacts rapidly with primary and
secondary amines, and also slowly with hydroxyl groups and thiols. Reaction conditions are
mild with relatively inert and non acidic by-products and therefore do not damage the GC
column (Lelowx et al., 1989). The general reaction is presented in equation 23:
F3COCN (CH3) OCCF3 + H-Y-R → F3OC-Y-R + CH3NHOCCF3
Equation 23: Representative reaction of the derivatization of amines, hydroxyl groups and
thiols using N-Methyl-bis(trifluoroacetamide) (MBTFA) reagent: Y = O, S, NH, NR´, R, R´ =
Alk, Ar.

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

99

N-Methyl-N-bis(trifluoroacetamide is recommended for the analysis of sugars (Matsuhisa,
2000; Hannestad, 1997) and as an acylation reaction is often used for amine drugs, such as
stimulants, amino acids, and alcohols.
In the method used by Matsuhisa, (2000), 20 μL of D-glucose standard aqueous solution
(10 μg/mL) was sampled and freeze-dried. Trifluoroacetylation was performed by adding
10 μL of pyridine and 10 μL of MBTFA (N-methyl-bis-trifluoroacetamide) to the dried
sample, and then heating at 60 °C for 60 minutes. The cooled sample was ready for GC
analysis.
Donike, (1973) applied the following procedure for the rapid derivatization of amines. To 10
mg sample, 0.2 mL MBTFA and 0.5 mL solvent of choice is added in a reaction vial. The vial
is capped and heat to 60 - 100 °C for 15 to 30 minutes. It was also observed that some
compounds with steric hindrance require additional heating.
2.3.1.4 Pentafluorobenzoyl Chloride (PFBCI)
Pentafluorobenzoyl chloride (PFBCI) is used in making derivatives of alcohols and
secondary amines of which secondary amines are the most highly reactive, forming the most
sensitive ECD derivatives of amine and phenol. Phenols are the most receptive site for this
reagent (Regis, 1999). Pentafluorobenzoyl chloride (PFBCI) is suitable for functional groups
that are sterically hindered. A base such as NaOH is often used to remove the HCl that is
produced as byproduct. This derivatization procedure which is presented by the reaction
below (equation 24) basically uses a pentafluorobenzoyl chloride (PFBCl) to provide rapid
formation of the derivatives of amines and phenols.
C6 F5-OCCl + C6H5-OH → C6 F5-OCO- C6H5 + HCl
Equation 24: Formation of derivatives of amines and phenols using Pentafluorobenzoyl
chloride (PFBCI).
The following derivatization procedure can be used for PFBCI reagent. In a 5 mL vial, 25 - 50
mg of sample and 2.5 mL of 2.5 N NaOH are dissolved. Then, 0.1 g of PFBCl, is added and
the vial is capped, shaken vigorously for 5 minutes. The derivative formed is extracted into
methyl chloride and dried over MgSO4. The sample is then injected directly onto the GC
column.
2.3.1.5 Pentafluoropropanol (PFPOH)
Pentafluoropropanol (CF3CF2CH2OH) is used in combination with pentafluoropropionic
anhydride (PFPA) and is applied commonly with polyfunctional bio-organic compounds
(Regis, 1999). For example, 2,2,3,3,3-Pentafluoropropanol is used in combination with PFPA
to make derivatives of the most common functional groups, especially polyfunctional bioorganic compounds (Regis, 1999). The formed derivatives are highly suitable for ECD.
Sample analysis and derivatization can be done through the following sequential
derivatization procedure, in which 1 mg of sample is added in a reaction vial, followed by
the addition of 50 μL PFPOH and 200 μL of PFPA. The sample is then heated to 75 °C for 15
minutes and then evaporated to dryness under N2. An additional 100 μL PFPA is added and
the sample is again heated to 75 °C for 5 minutes. The sample is finally evaporated to
dryness and dissolved in ethyl acetate prior to injection.

www.intechopen.com

100

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

2.3.1.6 4-Carbethoxyhexafluorobutyryl chloride (4-CB)
4-Carbethoxyhexafluorobutyryl chloride (4-CB) forms stable products with secondary
amines, such as methamphetamine, allowing the removal of excess agent by adding protic
solvents. 4-Carbethoxyhexafluorobutyryl chloride decreases the net charge of the peptides
and increased hydrophobicity (Klette, 2005). The following equation 25 shows the
derivatization of an amine using 4-CB reagent.
ClOCC3F6OCOC2H5 + R-NH2 → RNHOCC3F6OCOC2H5 + HCL
Equation 25: Amine derivatization using 4-Carbethoxyhexafluorobutyryl chloride (4-CB)
reagent.
The procedure for derivatization follows the one used by Dasgupta et al., (1997). In the
procedure, 50 μL of 4-CB is added to dried sample (dried by passing of a gentle stream of
nitrogen gas to remove the organic phase) followed by incubation at 80 °C for 20 minutes.
After derivatization the excess 4-CB is evaporated and the derivatized sample is
reconstituted in 50 μL ethyl acetate of which 1 - 2 μL is injected to GC for analysis.

3. GC Chiral Derivatization
Chiral derivatization involves reaction of an enatiomeric molecule with an enatiomerically
pure chiral derivatizing agent (CDA) to form two diastereomeric derivatives that can be
separated in this case using GC. A solution in which both enantiomers of a compound are
present in equal amounts is called a racemic mixture. Diastereomers are stereoisomers (they
have two or more stereo centers) that are not related as object and mirror image and are
therefore not enantiomers. In other word, unlike enatiomers which are mirror images of
each other and non-sumperimposable, diastereomers are not mirror images of each other
and non-superimposable. Diastereomers can have different physical properties and
reactivity.
Any molecule having asymmetric carbon is called as chiral molecule. Chirality of analyte
molecules requires special consideration in their analysis and separation techniques.
Scientists and other regulatory authorities are in the demand of data on concentrations and
toxicity of the chiral pollutants, and therefore chiral derivatization is becoming an essential,
urgent and demanding field. However the derivatization procedures are tedious and time
consuming due to the different reaction rates of the individual enantiomers (Schurig, 2001).
Generally, there are two ways of separating enantiomers by chromatography:
i.
ii.

Separation on an optically active stationary phase
Preparation of diastereomeric derivatives that can be separated on a non chiral
stationary phase.

The second option (ii above) requires derivatization of the analyte molecule. The presence of
a suitable functional group in a pollutant is a condition for a successful derivatization of a
chiral molecule. The indirect chromatographic analysis of racemic mixtures can be achieved
by derivatization with a chiral derivatizing agent resulting into the formation of
diastereoisomeric complex/salt (Hassan et al., 2004). From the resulting chromatograms,
calculations are made to determine the enantiomeric concentration of the analyte. The

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

101

diastereoisomers having different physical and chemical properties can be separated from
each other by an achiral chromatographic method. Nowadays, the chromatographic
methods are the most popular for enantiomeric analysis of environmental pollutants
(Hassan et al 2004).
3.1 Gas chromatography chiral derivatization reagents
Gas Chromatography analysis of enantiomeric compounds on nonracemic or achiral
stationary phases requires the use of enantiopure derivatization reagents (Hassan et al,
2004). Enantiopure compounds refer to samples that contain molecules having one chirality
within the limits of detection. These reagents generally target one specific functional group
to produce diastereomers of each of the enantiomeric analytes in GC to produce
chromatograms. Some of the most common Gass Chromatography chiral derivatization
reagents are: (-) menthylchloroformate (MCF), (S)-(–)-N-(Trifluoroacetyl)-prolylchlorides
(TPC), (–)-α-Methoxy-α-trifluoromethylphenylacetic acid (MTPA). Examples of the use of
these derivatizing agents were employed in analysis of major drugs of forensic interest, and
for optically active alcohols (Tagliaro et al., (1998).
3.1.1 N-trifluoroacetyl-L-prolyl chloride (TPC)
The reagent is used for optically active amines, most notably amphetamines as represented
in the following reaction (equation 26) where N-Trifluoroacetyl-L-prolyl chloride couples
with amines to form diastereomers which can be separated on GC columns as it increases
the sample volatility.

Equation 26: N-Trifluoroacetyl-L-prolyl chloride derivatization of amines
The standard TPC derivatization procedure is as follows; following sample clean up and
extraction procedure, 1.0 mL of the TPC reagent is added to the clean sample. The mixture is
allowed to stand for 5 min before the addition of 20 µL of triethylamine to take up excess
unreacted TPC. After 15 min of intermittent shaking, 1.0 mL of 6 N HC1 is used to remove
the ammonium salt. The mixture is finally washed with 1 mL of distilled water and then
dried over anhydrous magnesium sulfate before dilution and analyzed by GC.
3.1.2 (S)-(–)-N-(Trifluoroacetyl)-prolylchloride (l-TPC)
(S)- (–)-N-(Trifluoroacetyl)-prolylchloride (l-TPC) is widely used for amine drugs analysis.
Qiao Feng Tao & Su Zeng (2002) analyzed the enantiomers of chiral amine drugs by using
stereo selective methods to separate enantiomers on an achiral capillary gas chromatography
by pre-column chiral derivatization with S-(_)-N-(fluoroacyl)-prolyl chloride. In the study, it
was noted that the stereo selectivity and sensitivity can be improved by chiral derivatization.
The method has been used to determine S-(+) - methamphetamine in human forensic samples

www.intechopen.com

102

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

and to analyze enantiomers of amphetamine and fenfluramine in rat liver microsomes. Two
analytical procedures used by Qiao Fang Tao and Su Zing (2002) for aqueous and organic
phase derivatization methods are described below.
Aqueous phase derivatization method: Urine or liver homogenate was added to a 10 ml
Teflon-lined, screw-capped test tube. The pH of the sample was adjusted to 9 by 10 M
NaOH, then 0.5 ml of chilled 1 M sodium bicarbonate/sodium carbonate buffer (pH 9.0).
After mixing, 40 µL of S-(_)-TFAPC was added, and the tube was vortex mixed for 30 min at
room temperature. The resulting mixture was saturated with NaCl and adjusted to pH 9,
followed by addition of 0.5 ml of chilled 1 M sodium bicarbonate/sodium carbonate buffer
(pH 9.0) and extracted with 4 ml of ethyl acetate by gently shaking for 15 min. After the
phases separate, the organic layer was washed with 2 ml of deionized water. The organic
layer was evaporated to dryness under a gentle stream of air at 40 °C. The residue was
cooled to room temperature and reconstituted with ethyl acetate. An aliquot of 1 µL of
analyte was analyzed by GC/MS.
Organic phase derivatization method: A 1.0 ml sample of microsomal mixture spiked with
chiral amine was piped into a 15 ml screw capped test tube. The pH of the sample was
adjusted to 12 – 13 with 40% NaOH. The mixtures were extracted with 2 ml of chloroform
by rotatory shaking for 1 min. After centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 10 min, the aqueous
phase was removed by aspiration. The remaining organic phase was dried by anhydrous
sodium sulfate, and then transferred to another clean screw-capped test tube. A 10 µL
sample of triethylamine as a catalytic agent and 40 µL S-(_)-TFAPC were added into the test
tube and mixed. The tube was capped and allowed to react for 15 min at room temperature
by gentle shaking. The chloroform layer was washed with 2 ml distilled water and
evaporated to dryness at under a water bath and a gentle stream of air 50° C. The residues
were allowed to cool to room temperature and reconstituted with 40 µL ethyl acetate prior
to injection into the GC/FID system (Qiao Feng Tao & Su Zeng, 2002).
3.1.3 (–)-α-Methoxy-α-trifluoromethylphenylacetic acid (MTPA)
(–)-α-Methoxy-α-trifluoromethylphenylacetic acid is also mostly used in drug analysis. In a
study by S-M Wang et al., (2005) pharmaceutical drugs were analyzed using compounds
that were derivatized with (–)-α-Methoxy-α-trifluoromethylphenylacetic acid (MTPA) as the
derivatizing reagent. These types of derivatization reactions are represented by equation 27.
In the reaction the hydroxyl group on the MTPA molecule is lost in the derivative formation.

Equation 27: Derivatization reaction between (–)-α-Methoxy-α-trifluoromethylphenylacetic
acid and an amine group of an analyte molecule.
The derivatization using MTPA can be achieved as follows: after extraction, clean up and
drying the sample under nitrogen, the residue is added 50 μL N, Ndicyclohexycarbodiimide and 100 μL MTPA. The reaction mixture is then thoroughly
mixed, then incubated at 70 °C for 20 min before GC analysis.

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

103

4. Summary
The choice of the derivatization technique for analysis of compounds will depend on the
available reagent and reaction types that can produce derivatives that give desirable results
in GC. The derivatives must be suitable, detectable and efficient for GC analysis. The
evaluation of the functional group of the analyte, the GC detector and even the by products
of the reaction among others considerations will guide the choice of derivatization
technique.
For example, insertion of perfluoroacyl groups into a molecule enhances its detectability by
electron capture. The presence of a carbonyl group adjacent to halogenated carbons in an
analyte enhances the electron capture detector (ECD) response. For mass spectroscopic
detector, acyl derivatives tend to direct the fragmentation patterns of compounds and
therefore, providing useful information on the structure of molecules.
For acid analytes, the first choice for derivatization is esterification. Acids are reactive
compounds and also more polar to be separated well by gas chromatography. The
underivatized acids will tend to tail because of the adsorption and non-specific interaction
with the column. Esterification is used to derivatize carboxylic acids and other acidic
functional groups. The reaction involves the condensation of the carboxyl group of an acid
and the hydroxyl group of an alcohol, with the elimination of water. Consequently, the
polarity of the molecule is reduced.
Nearly all functional groups which present a problem in gas chromatographic separation
(hydroxyl, carboxylic acid, amine, thiol, phosphate) can be derivatized by silylation
reagents. The derivatives of the silylation reactions are generally less polar, more volatile
and more thermally stable. The introduction of a silyl group(s) can also serve to enhance
mass spectrometric properties of derivatives, by producing either more favorable diagnostic
fragmentation patterns of use in structure investigations, or characteristic ions of use in trace
analyses in other related techniques.
In considering the functional group or compound type, dimethylformamidedialkylacetals (DMF-DEA) or similar type of reagents are recommended for sterically
hindered aldehydes, amines, carboxylic acids, and phenols. Shorter chain reagents like
DMF- DEA will produce more volatile derivatives than longer chain reagents. The by
products of the reaction will also determine the choice of reagent. In this view,
perfluoroacylimidazole is a better choice rather than perfluoroacid anhydrides.
Perfluoroacid anhydrides produce acidic byproducts which must be removed from the
reaction mixture before the derivatives are injected onto the GC column. With
perfluoroacylimidazole there are no acid byproducts.
The complexity surrounding chiral derivatization is generally because of different reaction
rates of the individual enantiomers. Derivatization with a chiral derivatizing agent resulting
into the formation of diastereoisomeric complexes is an option in GC analysis, and has been
applied to analyze various analytes (Hassan et al., 2004 & Schurig, 2001). Table 1 gives a
summary guide of derivatization technique and reagent selection based on the functional
group of the analyte molecule.

www.intechopen.com

104

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

Functional group

Reaction
type

Alcohols and
Phenols

Silylation

Derivatization reagent

Acylation
Alkylation

Bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide,
Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide, N-methyl-N-tbutyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole, Pentafluoropropionic
Anhydride, Trifluoroacetic anhydride, N-Methylbis(trifluoroacetamide)
Dimethylformamide, Pentafluorobenzyl bromide
Bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide,
Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide, Trimethylsilylimidazole,
N-methyl-N-t-butyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
Pentafluoropropanol / pentafluoropropionic anhydride
Dimethylformamide, Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide
Bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide,
Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide / Trimethylchlorosilane,
Hydrox-Sil, N-methyl-trimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide,
Pentafluoropropanol / pentafluoropropionic anhydride
Dimethylformamide, Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide

Carbohydrates
and Sugars

Silylation

Hexamethyldisilzane, Trimethylsilylimidazole

Amides

Silylation

Acylation
Alkylation
Carboxylic acids

Silylation
Acylation
Alkylation

Active hydrogens Silylation

Acylation
Alkylation
Amines

Silylation
Acylation

Amino acids

Catecholamines

Alkylation
Silylation
Acylation
Alkylation
Silylation
Acylation

Inorganic anions

Silylation

Nitrosamine

Silylation
Acylation
Alkylation

Sulfonamides

Acylation

Sulfides

silylation

Bis(trimethylsilyl)–acetamide, N, O-bis-(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide
Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole
Dimethylformamide
Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide, N-methyl-N-tbutyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
Trifluoroacetic anhydride, Pentafluorobenzoyl chloride,
Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole
Dimethylformamide (Diacetals)
Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide, Trimethylsilylimidazole
Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole
Dimethylformamide, Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide
Trimethylsilylimidazole
Pentafluoropropionic Anhydride,
Heptafluorobutyrylimidazole,
Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide, N-methyl-N-tbutyldimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
Bistrimethylsilyltrifluoroacetamide
HFBA, Pentafluoropropionic anhydride, Trifluoroacetic
anhydride
Dimethylformamide, Pentafluorobenzyl bromide
Trifluoroacetoic & Heptafluorobutyric Anhydride,
Pentafluorobenzyl bromide
Trimethylsilylimidazole

Table 1. A summary guide for the derivatization techniques and reagents selection based on
sample types.

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

105

5. References
Allmyr M, McLachlan MS, Sandborgh-Englund G, Adolfsson-Erici M. (2006). Determination
of Triclosan as its pentafluorobenzoyl ester in human plasma and milk using
electron capture negative ionization mass spectrometry. Anal Chem. 2006; 78:
6542–6.
Bao Ming-Liang, Pantani Francesco, Griffini Osvaldo, Burrini Daniela, Santianni Daniela,
Barbieri Katia (1998). Determination of carbonyl compounds in water by
derivatization–solid-phase micro extraction and gas chromatographic analysis.
Journal of Chromatography A. 809 (1998) 75–87
Blau, K., King, G. (1997). Handbook of Derivatives for Chromatography; Heyden & Sons
Ltd.; London, 1979
Butts W.C. (1972). Two-column gas chromatography of trimethylsilyl derivatives of
Biochemically significant compounds.. Analytical Biochemistry. Volume 46, Issue 1,
March 1972, Pages 187-199
Chen, B.-G., Wang, S.-M. and Liu, R. H. (2007). GC-MS analysis of multiply derivatized
opioids in urine. Journal of mass spectrometry JMS (2007). Volume: 42, Issue: 8,
Pages: 1012-1023
Chien, C.-J.; Charles, M. J.; Sexton, K. G.; Jeffries, H. E. (1998). Analysis of airborne
carboxylic acids and phenols as their pentafluorobenzyl derivatives: gas
Chromatography/Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry with a novel chemical ionization
reagent, PFBOH, Environmental Science And Technology. 1998, 32, 299-309.
Christie, W.W. (1993): preparation of ester derivatives of fatty acids for chromatographic
analysis. Advances in Lipid Methodology - Two, pp. 69-111 (1993) (Ed. W.W.
Christie, Oily Press, Dundee),
Danielson, Neil D., Gallagher Patricia A., and Bao James J. (2000). Chemical Reagents and
Derivatization Procedures in Drug Analysis. Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry.
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester, 2000. R.A. Meyers (Ed.). pp. 7042–7076.
Dasgupta, Amitava, Blackwell Walter and Burns Elizabeth (1997). Gas Chromatographicmass spectrometric identification and quantitization of urinary phenols after
derivatization with 4-carbethoxyhexafluorobutyryl chloride, a novel derivative.
Journal of Chromatography B: Biomedical Sciences and Applications Volume 689,
Issue 2, 21 February 1997, Pages 415-421
Destaillats, H.; Spaulding, R. S.; Charles, M. J. (2002). Ambient air measurement of acrolein
and other carbonyls at the Oakland-San Francisco Bay Bridge toll plaza.
Environmental Science and Technology 2002, 36, 2227-2235.
Donike, M. (1973). Acylation with bis (acylamides). N-methyl-bus (trifluoroacetamide) and
bis (trifluoroacetamide), two new reagents for trifluoroacetylation. Journal of
Chromatography A. Volume 78, Issue 2, 25 April 1973, Pages 273-279.
Galceran, M. T.; Moyano, E.; Poza, J. M. (1995). Pentafluorobenzyl derivatives for the gaschromatographic determination of hydroxy-polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in
urban aerosols. Journal of Chromatography A 1995, 710, 139-147.
Gehrke, Charles W. (1968). Quantitative gas-liquid chromatography of amino acids in
proteins and biological substances: Macro, semimicro, and micro methods.
Analytical Biochemistry Laboratories (Columbia, Mo). 1st edition. 101-289-264

www.intechopen.com

106

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

Hannestad, U.; Lundblad, A. (1997). Accurate and Precise Isotope Dilution Mass
Spectrometry Method for Determining Glucose in Whole Blood. Clinical
Chemistry, 1997, 43, 5, 794-800.
Hassan, Y. Aboul-Enein & Imran Ali (2004): Analysis of the chiral pollutants by
Chromatography, Toxicological & Environmental Chemistry, 86:1, 1-22
Isoherranen, Nina and Soback Stefan (2000). Determination of gentamicin after
Trimethylsilylimidazole and trifluoroacetic anhydride derivatization using gas
Chromatography and negative ion chemical ionization ion trap mass spectrometry.
Analyst, 2000, 125, 1573–1576
Jang Myoseon and Kamens Richards, M. (2001). Characterization of Secondary Aerosol from
the Photooxidation of Toluene in the Presence of NOx and 1-Propene Environ. Sci.
Technol. 2001, 35, 3626-3639
Kataoka, Hiroyuki (2005). Gas chromatography of amines as various derivatives.
Quantitization of amino acids and amines by chromatography - methods and
protocols. Journal of Chromatography Library. Volume 70, 2005, Pages 364-404.
Kawahara, F.K. (1968). Micro determination of pentafluorobenzyl ester derivatives of
Organic acids by means of electron capture gas chromatography.
Klette, L Kevin., Jamerson H. Matthew, Morris-Kukoski L. Cynthia, Kettle R. Aaron, and
Snyder
J.
Jacob
(2005).
Rapid
Simultaneous
Determination
of
Amphetamine, Methamphetamine, 3, 4-Methylenedioxyamphetamine, 3, 4Methylenedioxymethamphetamine, and 3, 4-Methylenedioxyethyla. Journal of
Analytical Toxicology. Volume Number: 29: Issue 7: 669–674
Knapp, Daniel R. (1979). Handbook of Analytical Derivatization Reaction; pages 10, 10;
Wiley & Sons; New York, 1979.
Kühnel, E., Laffan Dr, D.D.P., Lloyd-Jones, G.C., Martínez del Campo, T., Shepperson, I.R.
Slaughter,J.L.,(2007). Mechanism of Methyl Esterification of Carboxylic Acids by
Trimethylsilyldiazomethane. Angewandte Chemie International Edition. Volume
46, Issue 37, pages 7075–7078, September 17, 2007.
Kuo, H.W., Ding, W.H. (2004). Trace determination of bisphenol A and phytoestrogens in
infant formula powders by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. J. Chromatogr.
A, 1027, 67.
Lelowx, M.S. De jong E.G and Meas RA.A. (1989). Improved screening method for betablockers in urine using solid- phase extraction and capillary gas chromatography—
mass spectrometry. Journal of Chromatography. 488 (1989). 357-.367.
Lin, D.-L. Wang, S.-M. Wu, C.-H. Chen, B.-G. Liu, R.H. (2008). Chemical Derivatization for
the Analysis of Drugs by GC- MS — A Conceptual Review. Journal of Food and
Drug Analysis, Vol. 16, No. 1, 2008, Pages 1-1
Matsuhisa, M.; Yamasaki, Y.; Shiba, Y.; Nakahara, I.; Kuroda, A.; Tomita, T. (2000).
Important Role of the Hepatic Vagus Nerve in Glucose Uptake and Production by
the Liver Metabolism, 2000, 49, No 1 (January), 11-16.
Naritisin, D.B. and Markey, S.P. (1996). Assessment of DNA oxidative damage by
Quantification of thymidine glycol residues using gas chromatography/electron
Capture negative ionization mass spectrometry. Anal. Biochem. 241:35-41.
Orata, F. Quinete, N. Wilken, R.D. (2009). Long Chain Perfluorinated Alkyl Acids
Derivatization and Identification in Biota and Abiota Matrices Using Gas

www.intechopen.com

Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis

107

Chromatography. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 2009
Vol. 83 No. 5 pp. 630-635
Palmer, R.B, Kim N.H. and Dasgupta A (2000). Simultaneous determination of fenfluramine
and phentermine in urine using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry with
pentafluoropropionic anhydride derivatisation. Ther. Drug Monit. 22 (2000). 418422.
Pierce, Alan E. (1968). Silylation of Organic Compounds. Pierce Chemical Company, 1968.
Pierce, (2004) .GC Derivatization. .Applications Handbook & Catalog.
Qiao Feng Tao and Su Zeng (2002). Analysis of enantiomers of chiral phenethylamine drugs
by capillary gas chromatography/mass spectrometry/flame–ionization detection
and pre-column chiral derivatization. J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 54 (2002) 103–
113.
Rao, X.; Kobayashi, R.; White-Morris, R.; Spaulding, R.; Frazey, P.; Charles, M. J. (2001). J
GC/ITMS measurement of carbonyls and multifunctional carbonyls in PM2.5
particles emitted from motor vehicles.Journal of AOAC International 2001, 84, 699705.
Ribeiro Bárbara, Guedes de Pinho Paula, Andrade B. Paula, Baptista Paula, Valentão
Patrícia. (2009). Fatty acid composition of wild edible mushrooms species: A
comparative study. Micro chemical Journal 93 (2009) 29–35 Regis (1999).
Chromatography Catalog, pages 89, 90
Saraji, M. and Mirmahdieh, S. (2009). Single-drop micro extraction Followed by in-syringe
derivatization and GC-MS detection for the determination of parabens in water and
cosmetic products. J. Sep. Sci. 2009, 32, 988 – 995
Schauer, J. J.; Kleeman, M. J.; Cass, G. R.; Simoneit, B. R. T. (2002). Environ. Science and
Technology 2002, 36, 1169-1180.
Schurig V (2001). Chiral separation of amino acids is of great importance in biology,
Pharmaceutics and agriculture. This has been performed traditionally with
Chromatographic methods such as gas chromatography (GC). J. Chromatogr. A
906 (2001) 275.
Scott, R. P.W. (2003). Gas chromatography. book 2 Chrom-Ed Book Series.
http://www.library4science.com/eula.html. 2
S-M Wang, Lewis j. Russell, Canfield Dennis, Li Tien-Lai, Chen Chang-Yu, Liu H. Ray
(2005). Enantiomeric determination of ephedrines and norephedrines by chiral
derivatization gas chromatography–mass spectrometry approaches. J. Chromatogr.
B 825 (2005) 88–95
Sobolevsky, T.G. Alexander I.R. Miller, B. Oriedo, V., Chernetsova, E.S., Revelsky, I. A.
(2003). Comparison of silylation and esterification/acylation procedures in GC-MS
analysis of amino acids. Journal of Separation Science. Volume 26, Issue 17, pages
1474–1478, November 2003
Spaulding, R. S.; Schade, G. W.; Goldstein, A. H.; Charles, M. J. Journal of Geophysical
Research, [Atmospheres] 2003, 108, ACH7/1-ACH7/17.
Szyrwińska, K. Kołodziejczak A., Rykowska I., Wasiak W., and Lulek J. (2007).
Derivatization and Gas chromatography– low-resolution Mass Spectrometry of
Bisphenol A. Acta Chromatographica, No. 18, 2007

www.intechopen.com

108

Advanced Gas Chromatography – Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications

Tagliaro Franco, Smith Frederick P, Tedeschi Luciano, Castagna Franca, Dobosz Marina,
Boschi Ilaria and Pascali Vincenzo (1998). Toxicological and Forensic Applications
Chapter 21. Journal of Chromatography Library Volume 60, 1998, Pages 917-961
Thenot, J.-P., Horning, E.C. (1972). Amino acid N-dimethyllaminomethylene alkyl esters.
New derivatives for GC and GC-MS studies. Anal. Lett.5 (8): 519-29.
Thenot, J. P, Stafford M. and Horning M. G. (1972). Fatty acid esterification with N, NDimethylformamide dialkyl acetals for GC analysis. Anal. Lett. 5(4): 217-23.
Zaikin, V.G., Halket, J.M (2003). Derivatization in mass spectrometry--2. Acylation. Eur J
Mass Spectrum. 2003; 9(5):421-34.
Zenkevich, Igor, G. (2009). Acids: Derivatization for GC Analysis Encyclopedia of
Chromatography, Third Edition 2009, DOI: 10.1081/E-ECHR3-120045222

www.intechopen.com

Advanced Gas Chromatography - Progress in Agricultural,
Biomedical and Industrial Applications
Edited by Dr. Mustafa Ali Mohd

ISBN 978-953-51-0298-4
Hard cover, 460 pages
Publisher InTech

Published online 21, March, 2012

Published in print edition March, 2012
Progress in agricultural, biomedical and industrial applications' is a compilation of recent advances and
developments in gas chromatography and its applications. The chapters cover various aspects of applications
ranging from basic biological, biomedical applications to industrial applications. Book chapters analyze new
developments in chromatographic columns, microextraction techniques, derivatisation techniques and
pyrolysis techniques. The book also includes several aspects of basic chromatography techniques and is
suitable for both young and advanced chromatographers. It includes some new developments in
chromatography such as multidimensional chromatography, inverse chromatography and some discussions
on two-dimensional chromatography. The topics covered include analysis of volatiles, toxicants, indoor air,
petroleum hydrocarbons, organometallic compounds and natural products. The chapters were written by
experts from various fields and clearly assisted by simple diagrams and tables. This book is highly
recommended for chemists as well as non-chemists working in gas chromatography.

How to reference

In order to correctly reference this scholarly work, feel free to copy and paste the following:
Francis Orata (2012). Derivatization Reactions and Reagents for Gas Chromatography Analysis, Advanced
Gas Chromatography - Progress in Agricultural, Biomedical and Industrial Applications, Dr. Mustafa Ali Mohd
(Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-51-0298-4, InTech, Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/advanced-gaschromatography-progress-in-agricultural-biomedical-and-industrial-applications/derivatization-reactions-andreagents-for-gas-chromatography-analysis

InTech Europe

University Campus STeP Ri
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A
51000 Rijeka, Croatia
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.com

InTech China

Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China
Phone: +86-21-62489820
Fax: +86-21-62489821

© 2012 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This is an open access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

