Review

Analysis of Intracellular Metabolites from
Microorganisms: Quenching and Extraction Protocols
Farhana R. Pinu 1,*, Silas G. Villas-Boas 2 and Raphael Aggio 3
The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research Limited, Private Bag 92169,
Auckland 1142, New Zealand
2 School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1010, New Zealand;
s.villas-boas@auckland.ac.nz
3 Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Institute of Translational Medicine,
University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool L693BX, UK; raphael.aggio@gmail.com
* Correspondence: Farhana.Pinu@plantandfood.co.nz; Tel.: +64-9-926-3565; Fax: +64-9-925-7001
1

Received: 1 September 2017; Accepted: 21 October 2017; Published: 23 October 2017

Abstract: Sample preparation is one of the most important steps in metabolome analysis. The
challenges of determining microbial metabolome have been well discussed within the research
community and many improvements have already been achieved in last decade. The analysis of
intracellular metabolites is particularly challenging. Environmental perturbations may
considerably affect microbial metabolism, which results in intracellular metabolites being rapidly
degraded or metabolized by enzymatic reactions. Therefore, quenching or the complete stop of cell
metabolism is a pre-requisite for accurate intracellular metabolite analysis. After quenching,
metabolites need to be extracted from the intracellular compartment. The choice of the most
suitable metabolite extraction method/s is another crucial step. The literature indicates that specific
classes of metabolites are better extracted by different extraction protocols. In this review, we
discuss the technical aspects and advancements of quenching and extraction of intracellular
metabolite analysis from microbial cells.
Keywords: metabolite footprinting; exometabolome; culture medium; metabolic modelling;
sample preparation; analytical instruments; data integration; extracellular metabolites; intracellular
metabolites

1. Introduction
Metabolomics can be described as a group of techniques applied to detect, identify and
potentially quantify small organic molecules (<1.5 kD) produced or modified by living cells [1]. These
techniques have been successfully applied in a wide variety of fields, such as chemistry, engineering,
medicine and biology [2–5]. In microbiology, metabolomics has been extensively applied to analyze
the intra- and extracellular metabolites present in microbial samples [6–8].
Ideally, metabolomics techniques should represent the metabolic state of a microbial population
at the exact moment that a sample is harvested and under the environmental conditions in which the
cells were growing. However, many important metabolites involved in cell metabolism, such as ATP
and NADH, can quickly be metabolized by enzymes or degraded (<1 mMs−1) when exposed to factors
such as temperature and light [9]. Consequently, the level of these metabolites may change very
rapidly during sampling and sample preparation, which would change their final concentrations,
producing results that may not represent the population’s true metabolic state. To acquire accurate
metabolomic results, the cell’s metabolism must be quickly stopped, or quenched, before or during
sampling [10,11].

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53; doi:10.3390/metabo7040053

www.mdpi.com/journal/metabolites

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

2 of 20

One key aim of metabolomics is to obtain as much information as possible about metabolite
levels associated with a biological sample. Intracellular metabolites are contained within a
mechanical barrier, the cell membrane or cell envelope. Therefore, in order to identify and quantify
intracellular metabolites, it is necessary to extract metabolites from the intracellular compartment.
This is usually achieved using extracting solvents (organic, inorganic non-aqueous or a mixture of
the two) that make the cell′s envelope porous, or permeable, allowing the penetration of these
solvents into the intracellular medium and greater recovery of intracellular metabolites. This process
also helps to separate “small” metabolites from macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids.
The complete disruption of the cell wall is unnecessary and on most occasions undesirable, as it
would result in the release of both small and large molecules into the extraction solution [9] and
metabolomics aims at analysing small molecules only.
An ideal method for extracting intracellular metabolites would be reproducible, able to equally
release intracellular metabolites of different classes whilst preventing chemical and biochemical
degradation and assuring the extraction goes to completion [12]. Completion cannot be easily
verified as metabolite levels are usually unknown a priori. The performance of an extraction method
can be assessed by applying different extraction methods to the same biological sample and then
comparing the methods’ abilities to extract the different metabolites. The latter is referred to as the
extraction efficacy. The level of metabolite degradation associated with an extraction method can also
be assessed. This is carried out by spiking metabolite standards into biological samples and
measuring the recovery rates of the different metabolites [13]. Losses during metabolite extraction
can be corrected by using metabolite-specific recovery factors or by applying adequate internal
standards (e.g., isotope-labeled compounds) [9,14]. The latter is recommended when possible.
A complete metabolome analysis of microbial cells would involve the following steps:
(a) Growing the microorganism under study using an appropriate culture media;
(b) Sample collection at suitable or desired stage of growth and quenching of microbial cells;
i
ii

Separation of microbial cells from growth media: The supernatant is used for extracellular
metabolite analysis;
Microbial cells are used for intracellular metabolite analysis;

(c) Extraction of intracellular metabolites;
(d) Metabolite analysis of intra- and extracellular metabolites using an appropriate instrumental
approach.
2. Cell Metabolism and Metabolite Turnover
Chemical compounds are the energy sources and the building blocks of a cell. They are used to
perform both essential biological functions and to maintain the structure of the cell. When a chemical
compound is oxidized or converted into a different compound with lower free energy content, it
releases energy that can be stored and used to perform biological processes. The set of chemical
conversions occurring in the cell is referred to as metabolism, while the chemical compounds involved
in metabolism are referred to as metabolites [1,15].
Conversion between metabolites, or turnover, is predominantly performed by enzymes, i.e.,
proteins that are able to reduce the energy required to modify the structure of a specific compound.
Whether an enzyme actually converts one compound into another and how quickly this happens
depends on a number of factors [16]. The substrates and cofactors required by each enzyme must be
available at specific levels. High or low levels of certain metabolites can actually act as inhibitors to
some enzymes (e.g., negative feedback). Activators may also be required and environmental factors,
such as temperature and pH, also determine the rate of conversion performed by an enzyme.
Metabolites can also spontaneously interact with each other or be degraded by factors such as
temperature or light [9]. Therefore, the level of each metabolite inside the cell is the result of the
difference between its formation and conversion into a different compound, i.e.,
METLEVEL = METFORMED − METCONSUMED

(1)

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

3 of 20

A cell requires an enormous diversity of processes to survive. It must be able to maintain cell
metabolism and produce the building blocks that allow its growth and reproduction. In addition,
some cells must synthesize very specialized compounds, such as osmoregulators, pigments and
antibiotics, which require specific enzymes and cofactors available at the right levels [9]. Thus, cell
metabolism has evolved to a highly complex network involving a massive number of metabolites and
enzymes. The interactions between these enzymes and compounds can be structured in a series of
reactions, or metabolic pathways, each one relating to particular cell requirements. Primary metabolic
pathways are associated with catabolism (breakdown) and anabolism (synthesis), such as reactions to
produce building blocks and free energy. Secondary metabolism pathways are associated with stress
responses, such as pathway production of antibiotics or pigments [16,17].
As primary metabolism is related to energy generation and cellular synthesis, its intermediates
are mostly substrates and products of numerous different enzymes (Figure 1). These enzymes
generally show a high rate of activity. Consequently, metabolites involved in primary metabolism
have a particularly fast turnover rate within the cell and are very likely to be found at low
abundances. Secondary metabolism pathways, on the other hand, are predominantly related to low
growth rate, stress response and breakdown of cellular components [13]. When growth is limited,
the secondary metabolism prevails. Intermediates from the secondary metabolism are precursors of
only a small number of reactions and, therefore, have a considerably slower turnover rate when
inside the cell. Consequently, the intracellular levels of intermediates from the secondary
metabolism are generally higher than the intracellular levels of intermediates from the primary
metabolism [9,18].

Figure 1. Regular metabolic state of a microbial cell and leakage promoted by quenching solutions.
Most of the intermediates of the primary metabolism are usually substrates of numerous different
enzymes and, consequently, are found in low abundance inside the cells. However, some
intermediate metabolites might also be secreted by microorganisms if produced in
adequate/abundant amounts. On the other hand, compounds of the secondary metabolism are
generally substrates of few reactions and, thus, accumulate inside of the cell or are secreted to the
extracellular medium. Quenching of microbial cells is generally performed by using an aqueous
solution containing an organic solvent set to an extreme temperature (very hot or very cold) or an
extreme pH (very acid or very basic). However, the quenching solution may interact with the cell
envelope, damaging its structure and, consequently, producing pores through which intracellular
metabolites can leak to the extracellular medium.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

4 of 20

Metabolites present in the extracellular environment, on the other hand, are originally part of
the medium composition, secreted by the cells, the product of cell lyses or the result of polymer
degradation [19]. Enzymes, if not absent, are generally found in much lower abundances
extracellularly and considerably diluted in the extracellular medium. Therefore, the turnover rate of
metabolites present outside the cells is considerably lower when compared to the turnover rate
intracellularly [20]. While factors such as metabolite interaction, temperature and light can change
the levels of extracellular compounds, the main source of variability for these metabolites is the
living cells in the medium. Thus, to avoid drastic changes in the extracellular pool of metabolites, the
microbial cells must be quickly removed from the media and a quenching solution may also be used
to stop potential degradation of metabolites [7,21]. It is also important that long exposure to light is
avoided and samples are always kept at low temperatures (<20 °C) [9].
3. Microbial Cell Envelopes and Leakage of Intracellular Metabolites
Cells of microorganisms are encapsulated by a cell-wall matrix, which protects the cell from
osmotic pressure while also providing it with both strength and shape. In this section we
characterize the different microbial cell envelopes and discuss their importance on intracellular
metabolite leakage during sampling and quenching.
3.1. The Microbial Cell Envelope
Although different microorganisms present different cell-wall matrixes, in most cases the cell
wall is composed of lipids, polysaccharides, peptides and glycopeptides. Most bacterial cells present
a thick or thin layer of peptidoglycan bounded by anionic polymers (e.g., teichoic acid) and a
continuous layer of glycopeptides (murein sacculus) surrounded by phospholipids and
lipopolysaccharides [22]. A technique called Gram staining is widely used to differentiate between
two types of cell-wall matrix (e.g., Gram positive or negative bacteria). The Gram-staining technique
is considered a basic procedure in the identification of bacterial cells and is routinely applied in
microbiology [23].
The envelope of yeast cells differs from those of bacterial cells in that the former is composed of
low amount of lipids, a higher percentage of proteins (30%–50% of the cell-wall matrix composition)
and polysaccharides, such as glucans and mannans [24–26]. It is thicker than the bacterial cell wall
and its thickness increases with age. Interestingly, yeasts’ cell walls also contain a small proportion
(1%–2%) of chitin (polysaccharide), which is the main component of the exoskeleton of insects and
crustaceans [25].
The envelope of filamentous fungi cells (moulds) is quite diverse and considerably different
from the envelope of yeast and bacterial cells. Filamentous fungi are considered a unique group of
organisms combining chitin and glucans in their cell-wall structure. In some species, chitin can
represent 20% of the cell-wall composition while glucans may represent about 50%–60% of its
structure. The rest of their cell-wall structure contains glycoproteins (15%–30%) and other
components that vary considerably among species [26]. However, there are dimorphic fungal cells
that alternate between yeast and hyphal stages depending on environmental conditions.
Microalgae are very particular and also highly diverse in their cell envelope composition. Most
of them, such as Haematococcus pluvialis, Chlamydomonas monoica and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
exhibit a drastic change in the structure of their cell walls according to their growth phase. For
example, most microalgae have an increase in resistant biopolymers, such as sporopollenin, as a
component of their cell wall when entering the cyst stage [27,28]. In addition, some species, such as
C. reinhardtii, have seven distinct layers composed of carbohydrates, glycoproteins and
hydroxyproline-rich proteins [29]; and diatoms have silicon deposits in their cell walls [30]. The total
wall thickness is quite variable among species, ranging from 100 nm to 440 nm, depending on
growth conditions and growth phases [31].
Like microalgae, the compositions of a protozoa’s cell walls also vary considerably between
species and are dependent on developmental stage. The cell-wall composition of Acanthamoeba
polyphaga, for example, ranges from being completely comprised of cellulose to a combination of

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

5 of 20

proteins and polysaccharides [32]. Because many of these microorganisms are parasites of human
cells, most studies of their cell-wall structure focus on glycocalyx [33], the surface coat covering the
cell-wall matrix, so that little is known about the proper cell-wall structure.
3.2. Leakage of Intracellular Metabolites
Most quenching methods applied to microbial cells are generally performed using different
solvent solutions combined with extreme temperatures (very cold or very hot) or extreme pH [34,35].
However, these solutions may potentially interact with the constituents of the cell-wall matrix and
damage its structure, resulting in the release of intracellular metabolites into the extracellular
medium (Figure 1). As the volume of the extracellular medium is generally much larger than the
intracellular volume of cells, these metabolites released into the medium become highly diluted and
their detection is difficult by most of the analytical methods that are currently available. In addition,
the presence of extracellular compounds interferes with the quantification of intracellular
compounds, resulting in the wrong estimation of metabolite abundances [9,21].
Since different cell types have distinct cell-wall composition, the amount of intracellular
metabolite leakage caused by different quenching solutions can differ between organisms. Some
quenching methods may produce satisfactory results with one cell type but not another. Thus, the
choice of best quenching method depends on the cell type under study.
4. Overview of Available Quenching Methods for Microbial Cultures
The need to quickly quench microbial cells’ metabolisms in order to obtain an accurate
measurement of intracellular metabolites levels was recognized as early as 1960 [36]. Since then, it
has been widely discussed by many biochemists and biologists [10,13,34,35,37–50]. One of the
earliest methods proposed involved sampling the culture broth directly into an acidic solution of
perchloric acid [34,44]. This approach was once considered very efficient; however, it has since been
shown to have some disadvantages for metabolomics. The perchloric acid solution disrupts the cell
envelope and releases intracellular metabolites into the extracellular medium, resulting in a single
mixed pool of metabolites containing both intra- and extracellular compounds [38]. The
quantification of intracellular compounds is then estimated by subtracting the level of extracellular
compounds in the spent culture media. However, this approach generates large variability in the
quantification of intracellular metabolites due to interference from highly concentrated media
components during chemical analysis and chemical degradation of pH labile metabolites [51].
Saez and Lagunas (1976) addressed part of this when they developed a method able to quench
the cell metabolism and extract intracellular metabolites in two different steps [47]. Using fast
filtration followed by biomass immersion in liquid nitrogen, they were able to separate living cells
and cultured media. The low temperature of liquid nitrogen slows down the cell metabolism and
decreases the turnover of metabolites, providing extra time for the metabolite extraction. They
subsequently performed intracellular metabolite extraction using acidic and alkaline solutions.
However, this method requires more than 10 s per sample to actually quench cell metabolism and,
consequently, it is unsuitable for analysing compounds of fast turnover rates such as ATP, NADH,
pyruvate, glutamate, and many others [47].
In 1992, de Koning and van Dam proposed a quenching method that is until now considered
the gold standard in quenching of microbial cells [49]. It uses direct sampling into 60% v/v methanol
solution kept at −40 °C. The cell biomass is then separated from the culture medium by
centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 20 min. The fast sampling strategy combined with the low
temperature used by de Koning and van Dam arrests enzymatic activity of yeast cells in less than 1 s.
The cells are then further submitted to intracellular metabolite extraction.
The use of cold-methanol solution has been considered very efficient and its use continues to be
popular these days. However, an appropriate quenching method for microbial cultures must also
prevent leakage of intracellular metabolites into the extracellular medium during quenching.
Although de Koning and van Dam (1992) reported that the use of cold-methanol solution as a
quenching agent promoted no, or very little, cell leakage [49], recent studies have shown that the

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

6 of 20

membrane of yeast and bacterial cells are actually vulnerable to cold-methanol solution
[10,13,18,21,40,41]. Bolten and co-workers (2007), for example, showed a 90% reduction in the
concentration of free amino acids when quenching microbial cells with cold-methanol solution [13].
Variants of the original method proposed by de Koning and van Dam (1992) have been proposed for
quenching yeast and bacterial cells [13,38,40,52,53]. Although some satisfactory results were
observed, the use of cold-methanol solution for quenching the metabolism of microbial cells remains
controversial.
Other quenching methods have been developed since the introduction of cold-methanol
solution. In 2002, Chassagnole and co-workers used liquid nitrogen (−196 °C) for quenching cells of
Escherichia coli [54]. However, because the liquid nitrogen freezes the biomass, it is very likely to
produce ice crystals that can damage the cell membrane and promote leakage of intracellular
metabolites. Thus, this method is not commonly used. However, Wittmann and co-workers (2004)
and Bolten and co-workers (2007) proposed quenching bacterial cells by applying fast filtration
under vacuum followed by biomass washing using either cold or room-temperature saline solution
[13,41]. Although efficient for quenching reactions involving amino acids and some tricarboxylic
acid intermediates, these methods take up to 45 s per sample if performed manually, which is not
suitable for quenching metabolic reactions with fast turnover rates.
Villas-Bôas and Bruheim (2007) [21] presented what they called “the promising quenching
solution for accurate intracellular metabolite analysis of microbial cells.” They compared their novel
method, based on a solution of cold glycerol–saline at −23 °C, to the well-known 60% v/v
cold-methanol solution proposed originally by de Koning and van Dam and reported an excellent
improvement in the recovery of intracellular compounds. Some metabolites, such as
3-hydroxyoctanoate, caprinate, glycerate, 2-oxoglutarate, pyroglutamate and dehydroabietate, were
only detected in samples quenched by cold 60% v/v methanol solution and the abundances of all
other intracellular metabolites were significantly higher (some of them more than 100-fold higher)
than in samples quenched by cold glycerol–saline solution. However, the intracellular metabolite
leakage associated with this method (if present) could not be directly quantified by the authors due
to great interference of glycerol in the supernatant of quenched samples [55]. Nonetheless, based on
the different levels of intracellular metabolites, the authors reported that using cold glycerol–saline
solution as a quenching agent assured a much lower level of intracellular metabolite leakage when
compared to cold-methanol solution.
The great majority of the quenching methods developed to date target bacterial and/or yeast cells.
Few quenching methods have been reported that halt the metabolism of filamentous fungi, microalgae
and protozoa. As the cell-wall compositions within these groups of microorganisms are very diverse,
developing quenching methods suitable for the range of different cell structures is very difficult.
Table 1 summarises some literature resources for widely used and modified quenching protocols
for microbial cells. We consider a combination of cold glycerol–saline solution and centrifugation
followed by methanol–water solution to be the most efficient strategy for quenching cells.
Table 1. Summary of literature reports on widely used methods for quenching microbial cultures.
Year
1963
1976
1992
1996

1998
2004
2005

Quenching Method
Perchloric acid solution
Fast filtration followed by liquid nitrogen
immersion of biomass
Cold-methanol (60% v/v) solution
Buffered methanol (60% v/v) solution at
−45 °C
Dropping mycelium cultures in liquid
nitrogen or spraying the culture on a cold
methanol (60% v/v) solution followed by
rapid centrifugation
Quick filtration
32.5% methanol solution in water

Organism
Bacteria (Aerobacter aerogenes)

Reference
[44]

Yeast

[47]

Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)

[49]

Filamentous fungi (Aspergillus niger)

[48]

Filamentous fungi (Monascus ruber)

[17]

Bacterium (Corynebacterium glutamicum)
Microalgae (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii)

[41]
[56]

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

2006
2007

supplemented with CaCl2, MgCl2 and
KCl
Immersion of culture flasks to ethanol–
dry ice bath
60% v/v cold-methanol solution with
different additives

2007

Fast filtration

2007

Cold glycerol–saline solution

2008
2010

Pure methanol at −40 °C
Cold glycerol solution and fast filtration
Comparison of four different quenching
method based on aqueous cold-methanol
solution
40% v/v of methanol solution at −20 °C
Automated fast filtration and on-filter
quenching

2011
2012
2014

7 of 20

Protozoa (Leishmania donovani)

[57]

Bacteria (Lactobacillus plantarum)

[38]

Bacteria (Bacillus subtilis,
Corynebacterium glutamicum, Escherichia
coli, Gluconobacter oxydans, Pseudomonas
putida, and Zymononas mobilis)
Bacteria and yeast (Pseudomonas
fluorescens, Streptomyces coelicolor and
Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
Bacteria, yeast and filamentous fungi

[10]
[58]

Yeast (Pichia pastoris)

[52]

Mould (Penicillium chrysogenum)

[39]

Bacteria (Escherichia coli)

[11]

[13]

[21]

4.1. Bacterial Cells
The most cited methods for quenching bacterial cells are based on perchloric acid solution [34,44],
cold-methanol solution [49], fast filtration combined with saline solution [13,41], glycerol–saline
solution [21] and liquid nitrogen [47]. Some of these methods also consider using buffered solution in
order to prevent large variation in pH. However, most aqueous solutions containing organic
solvents may damage the cell-wall matrix and promote leakage of intracellular metabolites.
Analysts must be aware that bacterial cells are particularly sensitive to cold shock and that
intracellular metabolites may leak when the cells are subjected to quick changes in temperature [41,53].
According to Leder (1972), the cold-shock phenomenon can be prevented or minimized by a
simultaneous hyperosmotic transition [59]. Because the hyperosmolarity dries the cell’s periphery, it
increases the interaction between the membrane lipids preserving the cell’s integrity. Others have
also demonstrated that osmotic equilibrium between quenching solution and cell culture prevents
cell leakage in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria [60,61].
4.2. Yeast Cells
Yeast cells are considered less sensitive than bacterial cells against the cold-shock phenomenon
and organic solvents. However, the traditional cold methanol–water solution [49], buffered and
non-buffered, seems to promote cell leakage significantly when applied to yeast cells [10,62].
Villas-Boas and Bruheim (2007) compared the efficiencies of cold glycerol–saline solution, cold
methanol–water solution, glycerol–water solution, glycerol–saline solution and glycerol–mannitol
solutions in quenching yeast and bacterial cells [21]. They reported a considerable leakage promoted
by the traditional cold-methanol solution and also reported that the cold glycerol–saline solution
produces better results in recovering intracellular metabolites. In 2008, Canelas and co-workers once
again reported the leakage promoted by the traditional cold methanol–water solution and proposed
the use of 100% cold-methanol solution, which seems to produce considerably less leakage of
intracellular compounds [10].

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

8 of 20

Other methods (Table 1) such as boiling ethanol, perchloric acid and liquid nitrogen have also
been tested for quenching yeast cells; however, none of them seem to prevent leakage of intracellular
compounds and some of these methods are particularly difficult to apply.
4.3. Filamentous Fungi and Bacteria
Quenching filamentous fungi and filamentous bacteria is a more complex process than
quenching bacterial or yeast cells. The cell structure of filamentous organisms is very diverse. In
addition, cultures of filamentous fungi are generally more viscous and heterogeneous than cultures
of unicellular microorganisms. Consequently, there is not yet a standard method for quenching all
types of filamentous fungi or bacteria.
Some methods propose the use of liquid nitrogen [17], cold-methanol solution [48] and fast
filtration combined with cold-methanol solution [58]. Liquid nitrogen is efficient for stopping the
cell metabolism but prevents further separation of intra- and extracellular metabolites if cultures are
grown in liquid broth. Ruijter and Visser applied 60% v/v methanol buffered with 200 mM
tri-ethanolamine at −45 °C for quenching the metabolism of Aspergilus niger [48]. Based on the
quantification of metabolites, such as ATP, ADP and AMP, the authors reported no significant
leakage of these targeted intracellular metabolites to the extracellular medium. Further biomass
separation was performed by vacuum filtration after quenching. However, there was no
comprehensive evaluation of intracellular metabolite leakage apart from those targeted
phosphorylated nucleotides. Fast filtration combined with cold-methanol solution was also reported
as efficient in quenching the cell metabolism of filamentous fungi, and it also allows the separation
of intra- and extracellular metabolites [58]. However, fast filtration takes up to 45 s per sample,
which may result in high variability in the estimation of intracellular metabolites levels with high
turnover rates.
4.4. Protozoa
As with filamentous fungi, there are very few protocols describing quenching methods for
protozoa cells. Protozoa are also a very diverse group of microorganisms in regard to their cell
structure at different life phases. De Souza and co-workers (2006) suggested the immersion of the
whole culture broth into a bath with dry ice–ethanol until the cell suspension reached 0 °C in order
to quench cells of the protozoa Leishmania donovani in promastigote life stage. Afterwards, a solution
of cold phosphate-buffered saline (0 °C) was used to wash the cells and separate the biomass from
the rich culture medium. The authors monitored the presence of intracellular metabolites in the
supernatant and concluded that this quenching method induced none or very little leakage of
intracellular metabolites [57].
4.5. Microalgae
As with filamentous fungi and protozoa, the cell envelope of microalgae is also diverse and
may be very complex according to the developmental stage. Bolling and Fiehn (2005) modified the
quenching method developed by de Koning and van Dam (1992) for quenching the metabolism of
the microalgae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii [56]. They sprayed a cell suspension of C. reinhardtii into a
solution of 32.5% methanol–water supplied with tris-acetate phosphate (TAP) macro salts. The
authors used TAP medium in presence of labelled [U−14C] acetic acid in order to evaluate the
quenching efficiency of this method, which proved to be very satisfactory. Other methods may be
modified and adapted for quenching the cells of different species.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

9 of 20

5. Devices for Fast Sampling
Many factors may influence the efficiency of a quenching method. Within these, the time
between sampling and the actual quench of the cell metabolism is considered one of the most
important. Because the inter-conversion of metabolites may happen in the order of seconds, a quick
sampling and quenching method is essential for producing an accurate picture of the in vivo cell
metabolism. Recently, a direct sampling method for the real-time metabolome profiling of bacterial
cells (e.g., E coli) using a high-resolution mass spectrometer (time of flight) has been published by
Link et al [63]. This method proved to be superior in comparison to manual sampling, thus allowing
the monitoring of the dynamics of metabolic activity across the full mass range on a resolution of 15–30 s
in different organisms [63]. Although it is indeed a better method for metabolome profiling, such a
high-resolution mass spectrometer is still not available for most of the researchers in the metabolomics
community. Therefore, quick sampling of microbial cultures either from culture flasks or from bioreactors
is used by many, and some examples and advancements are presented below.

5.1. Sampling from Culture Flasks
Culture flasks are usually sampled manually. Generally, pipettes or syringes are used to
harvest a specific amount of sample and quickly spray it into a flask containing the quenching
solution. Therefore, the analyst must be very well trained in rapidly transferring reproducible
amounts of culture broth to quenching flasks. A good alternative is the use of a syringe prefilled
with the quenching solution [13], which reduces the time frame required for the quenching solution
to mix with the living cells. Alternatively, the analyst can pour the biological sample directly into
quenching solution and quickly homogenize it, as demonstrated in an online video [58].
Independent of the method used, it is important to guarantee fast sampling and a controlled
amount of sample harvested each time in order to minimise technical variability. For that, the
analyst can always weigh the flask containing the quenching solution before and after sampling.
5.2. Sampling from Bioreactors
Manual, semi-automated and fully automated techniques have been developed for sampling
microbial cultures from bioreactors. Manually, syringes are the most common technique used for the
quick harvesting of microbial culture from bioreactors. However, even experienced analysts are
unable to manually sample bioreactors within 4 to 5 s/sample. Therefore, several semi-automated
and fully automated sampling devices have been developed to improve sampling time and achieve
better reproducibility.
Semi-automated devices were presented by Harrison and Maitra (1969) [34] and afterwards
improved by Theobald et al. (1993) [64]. This device had specially designed valves to aseptically
harvest and quench biological samples in about 0.5 s per sample. However, some of the steps
required by these methods were still performed manually and, thus, their reproducibility depended
on the skills of the analyst operating the device. In 1996, Larsson and Törnkvist addressed part of
this problem when they developed an electronically controlled valve [65]. An electronic timer was
used to set a specific time frame for the valve to be opened and release the biological sample directly
into a tube containing the quenching solution. The authors validated this method by quantifying
glucose consumption in fed-batch cultures of Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. However,
this system still depended on an analyst to insert and collect the testing tubes, which is
time-consuming and precludes high-frequency sampling.
It was not until 1998 that the first fully-automated system for harvesting and quenching
microbial cells was built [66]. Schaefer and co-workers (1999) developed this device to dynamically
investigate the glucose metabolism of E. coli. The main idea consisted of continuously spraying
culture broth samples into sample tubes filled with quenching solution that moved at a defined
speed underneath the bioreactor. The authors used a magnetic pinch valve inserted in the bottom of
the bioreactor pointing to a magazine located underneath. This magazine had the capacity to
horizontally transport 16 quenching tubes. As a result of the higher pressure inside the bioreactor,

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

10 of 20

when the magnetic valve was opened, it continuously sampled culture broth at 3.3 ml s−1 into each
individual sample tubes containing cold quenching solution moving underneath the bioreactor. This
system allowed a sampling rate of 4.5 samples per second. Many other systems have been developed
using similar technology [67–69]. Each of these systems has advantages and drawbacks when
applied to different experimental conditions. Thus, we suggest a careful analysis of the sampling
system before applying any of these technologies.
Stopped-Flow Systems
When studying the dynamics of the cell metabolism, a commonly applied strategy is called
stimulus-response or continuous perturbation experiments [49,64,66]. It consists of quickly
disturbing the cell metabolic state growing in chemostats and recording the concentration of
metabolites at different time points. The different levels of each metabolite at each time point allow
the analyst to infer reaction rates and, consequently, understand the regulation of specific pathways.
Stimulus response is achieved by, for example, applying a substrate pulse to a substrate-limited
culture under steady state [16,70]. For instance, a concentrated solution of glucose can be injected
into a glucose-limited chemostat culture to study the regulation of glycolysis. The solution of
glucose shifts the cell metabolic state, giving the possibility of recording the gradual changes in
metabolite concentrations through the different reactions of the pathway.
Stimulus-response experiments can be performed using the fast sampling systems described
above. However, it has some drawbacks when multiple stimuli are to be studied. Every stimulus
must be applied when the cell culture reaches the steady-state condition. However, when the first
perturbing agent is introduced into the cell culture, the culture steady-state is lost and, depending on
the organism under study and the dilution rate applied, it may require more than 48 h and many
litres of media to reach a new steady-state. In addition, there is a time frame required for the
perturbing solution to mix with the cell culture and actually affect the metabolism of all living cells
in the bioreactor. This time frame depends on the stirring speed, the volume of the culture and the
viscosity of the liquid. Finally, the high volume of the bioreactors requires a large amount of
perturbing agent, which may increase significantly the overall costs of the experiment.
A solution for these limitations is presented by the sampling systems called stopped flow. These
systems rely on applying the desired perturbations in a secondary flask, or outlet, sitting outside the
bioreactor. A defined volume of cell culture is driven to the outlet where the stimulus solution is
simultaneously injected. The low volume of the secondary flask promotes a quick and uniform mix
between the stimulus solution and the cell culture. In addition, as the whole pulse-response process
happens outside the bioreactor, the steady-state is maintained and a new experiment can be
subsequently performed in little time. An efficient stopped-flow sampling system must be able to
sample and quench microbial cells at a high frequency and in a reproducible manner.
Many different stopped-flow systems have been developed to date. In 1992, de Koning and van
Dam proposed a stopped-flow system using a freeze quench device in order to analyze changes in
glycolytic metabolites [49]. However, this system was not connected to a continuous growth culture,
which avoided the analysis of the glycolytic pathway starting from a defined physiological
condition or steady-state condition. In 2002, Buziol and co-workers modified the method developed
by de Koning and van Dam. They built a fully-automated stopped-flow sampling system connected
to a standard port of the bioreactor [71]. This system was built using a mixing chamber located
outside the bioreactor and five three-way valves controlled by computer software. A sample of the
culture broth was mixed with the disturbing agent in the mixing chamber and redirected to a
sequence of sample tubes located at distinct distances from the bioreactor. The different distances
travelled by the sample represent the gradual changes in the metabolic state of the cell. This system
also allows individual sample volumes and the first sample is harvested in less than 100 ms after the
injection of the disturbing solution. However, there is still one limitation. This system did not allow
the exchange of oxygen while the sample was processed outside the bioreactor. Consequently, the
metabolic state of the cell culture was also influenced by oxygen limitation when aerobic
experiments were performed.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

11 of 20

Visser et al. developed a stopped-flow sampling system that overcame this problem [37]. The
so-called BioScope was built using a flow channel with oxygen-permeable silicon tubing, which
allowed oxygen exchange even when the culture broth was being directed to 11 different sample
tubes located outside of the bioreactor. In addition, its silicon tubing was built using a serpentine
configuration, which improved the mixing rate between the culture and the perturbing solution.
Later this system was further improved [72] by the use of a new technology of O2/CO2 silicon
membrane, which is more flexible for switching from aerobic to anaerobic conditions and requires
lower to minimum maintenance.
6. Extraction of Intracellular Metabolites: Disruption Methods for Microbial Cell Envelopes
Different factors are directly responsible for the shape and strength of the cell envelope
(structure and composition) of different microorganisms. The complexity of a microbial cell
envelope mainly depends on the structural polymeric composition of the cell and the degree of
cross-linking between these polymers and other cell-wall components. Therefore, the major
resistance that needs to be overcome during the disruption of cell envelopes is the covalent chemical
bonds between the structural components. Both mechanical and non-mechanical methods are
widely used for cell envelope disruption [9]. Table 2 summarizes the different extraction protocols
used by the metabolomics community for the extraction of the intracellular metabolites from
microbial samples.
Mechanical disruption of the cell envelope can be affected by different factors, such as polymer
concentration within the cell wall, cell size and shape and degree of cross-linking between the
polymers. However, the ease of mechanical cell disruption depends on the complexity and
composition of the cell envelope. For example, the cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria can be easily
ruptured using mechanical methods when compared with the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria.
Similarly, the cell-wall composition of yeasts and filamentous fungi is more complex than that of
bacteria; therefore, the disruption of their cell wall requires stronger mechanical forces [9]. Different
mechanical cell-disruption methods are available (Table 2). Most of the methods are not very
popular in the preparation of microbial metabolome samples as they result in the release of small
and large metabolites, which is not desired in most metabolomics studies.
Non-mechanical cell enveloped disruption methods are generally preferred for the extraction of
the intracellular metabolites from microorganisms. In this case, chemical or physical agents are used
to make the cell envelope permeable so that the intracellular metabolites can be released into the
cytoplasmic medium. Different disrupting agents, such as, enzymatic, mechanical and chemical, can
be used for the preparation of intracellular samples. The application of both enzymatic and physical
agents is quite limited in metabolomics because of their ability to degrade the polymeric components
of the cell envelope and result in leakage of large molecules. Some of these enzymatic-physical
methods can be combined with chemical methods to enhance the extraction process. Chemical lysis
of the cell envelopes is part of the majority of protocols developed to extract intracellular metabolites
from microbial cells (Table 2). Ideally, these protocols should be modified to obtain optimum
performance based on the cell-wall structure and composition of microorganisms [9]. The next
sections of this chapter will be focused on the methods that are commonly used to extract the
intracellular metabolites from microorganisms.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

13 of 20

Table 2. Literature evidence of the application of different extraction methods for intracellular metabolites from microorganisms.
Extraction Method
CHEMICAL EXTRACTIONS

Extracted Metabolites

Boiling ethanol

Polar (thermostable)

Cold methanol

Polar and mid polar

Buffered methanol–water–
chloroform
Hot water

Polar (thermostable)

Acidic extraction

Polar and acid stable

Alkaline extraction

Polar and alkali stable

MECHANICAL EXTRACTIONS
Superficial fluid extraction
Pressurised liquid extraction
Microwave
COMBINATION OF CHEMICAL
AND MECHANICAL
EXTRACTION
Pure cold methanol coupled to
sonication
Methanol and bead mill
Cold methanol–water solution
coupled to freeze–thaw cycles

Polar and non-polar

Microorganisms
Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus sp., Penicillium chrysogenum, Monascus ruber,
Klebsiella oxytoca, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis and Lactobacillus
plantarum
Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus sp., Zymomonas mobilis, Penicillium sp.,
Klebsiella oxytoca, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas putida, Gluconobacter oxydans,
Corynebacterium glutamicum, Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis and
Lactobacillus plantarum
Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli, Bacillus licheniformis and Klebsiella
oxytoca
Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli and Klebsiella oxytoca
Monascus ruber, Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus niger, Klebsiella oxytoca,
Bacillus licheniformis and Escherichia coli
Monascus ruber, Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus niger, Klebsiella oxytoca and
Escherichia coli

References

[12,17,18,37,38,40,51,73–79]

[13,18,39,51,73,75,80,81]

[12,18,51,74,81,82]
[12,74,83]
[17,18,38,74,78,81,84]
[17,18,51,74,76,78]

Non-polar to mid polar
Secondary metabolites
Thermostable metabolites

Agaricus sp., Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria
Yeasts and microalgae
Yeasts

[85–90]
[89,91,92]
[91]

Polar, mid polar and stable

Sacharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus sp., Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis

[73]

Polar and mid polar

Clinically relevant bacteria

[93]

Polar and mid polar

S. cerevisiae, Aspergillus sp., Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis

[73]

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

14 of 20

6.1. The Extraction of Intracellular Metabolites by Chemical Lysis
The most popular methods for intracellular metabolite extraction are based on the application
of chemical agents (Table 2). Metabolites are generally distributed between two phases according to
their partitioning coefficients, solubility, solvent temperature, and the relative volumes of the
phases. The aim in this case is to concentrate metabolites in a single phase, which can be achieved by
using chemical agents [9]. While selecting an appropriate chemical agent, one should consider the
metabolite extraction rates associated with this specific chemical. The extraction rates may change in
response to temperature and diffusion rates in the two phases that would allow the solvent to get
into the cell envelope to extract the intracellular metabolites. As a result, the extraction rate of a
chemical agent is also directly linked to the degree of cell permeabilization. Therefore, the choice of
chemical agents and extraction conditions depends on the type of microbial cells targeted and the
groups of metabolites of interest. Many chemical extraction methods simply aim at extracting a few
metabolite species (e.g., fatty acids, amino acids). However, the ideal metabolome analysis aims at
extracting as many classes and species of metabolites as possible. Hence, the metabolomics
community has been emphasizing the necessity to use, when applicable, multiple extraction
methods in order to obtain a comprehensive as possible intracellular metabolite profile [12,73–75]
Both polar (e.g., methanol or ethanol) and non-polar (e.g., ethyl acetate, hexane and chloroform)
solvents are extensively employed for the extraction of microbial intracellular metabolites. The
organic solvents have the ability to weaken the cell wall, cell membrane proteins and lipids;
therefore, they can form pores in the cell envelope. Then the intracellular metabolites are released
through the pore and extracted into the organic solvent. However, the ideal solvent-extraction
methods should require a small of amount of solvent. In addition, the volume of sample, the
extraction time and the broadness of the coverage metabolites are three other important parameters
while choosing a suitable extraction protocol [9,18,73]. In this section, we are going to discuss only
the most popular extraction protocols that are commonly used to prepare the intracellular samples
from microorganisms.
6.1.1. Boiling Ethanol
The use of buffered boiling ethanol (75% v/v) is a simple and rapid intracellular metabolite
extraction protocol. This method was first reported by Entian et al. [94] and later it was further
modified and improved by Gonzalez, Francois and Renaud [40] for the extraction of polar
metabolites from yeast cells. In this method, the quenched microbial cells are exposed to buffered
boiled ethanol (80 °C) for several minutes, which causes the deactivation of enzymes and proteins.
The heating also enhances cell disruption, thus allowing the extraction of water-soluble intracellular
metabolites. After that, the ethanol–water mixture is evaporated and the pellets are resuspended in
water prior to analysis. One of the main advantages of this method is its good reproducibility [9].
However, several authors reported that there was poor recovery for several classes of metabolites,
such as, phosphorylated metabolites, nucleotides and tricarboxylic acids [18,51]. Furthermore, this
extraction protocol is not suitable for thermo-labile metabolites and there is a chance of oxidation for
reduced metabolites [9]. However, the boiling ethanol extraction method is one of the most popular
methods that has been used for the extraction of intracellular metabolites for many years.
6.1.2. Cold Methanol
Cold-methanol extraction is an extensively used method that is also another simple and fast
method for the extraction of the intracellular metabolites from a wide range of microbial cells. For
instance, cold methanol has been used to extract metabolites from bacteria [51,73,74], yeasts
[18,73,75,80] and filamentous fungi [17,73]. This is a very powerful method that uses only a single
organic solvent that can be easily removed from the samples simply by sample evaporation.
Moreover, the extraction process is generally performed under very low temperature (<−20 °C), thus
it is suitable for thermo-labile metabolites. The main disadvantage of this method is the lack of

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

15 of 20

complete enzyme inactivation and, thus, there is a risk of change on intracellular metabolite pools.
This method also showed excellent reproducibility and great recovery for polar and mid-polar
metabolites. However, the recovery of non-polar metabolites is not as good as polar metabolites [18].
Cold-methanol extraction is sometimes coupled with freeze–thaw cycles or sonication in order to
enhance the cell permeability [73].
6.1.3. Buffered Methanol–Chloroform–Water
The extraction of intracellular metabolites (total lipids) from animal tissue using buffered
methanol–chloroform–water was first reported by Folch et al. [95]. However, the first method that
was employed for a microbial system was published by de Koning and van Dam [49]. They used a
mixture of buffered methanol–water–chloroform at low temperature (−40 to −20 °C) while shaking
the mixture vigorously (about 300 g for 45 min) to extract polar metabolites of yeast cells. This
method is highly useful for the extraction of both polar and non-polar metabolites from bacteria,
yeasts and filamentous fungi. Thermo-labile metabolites can also be extracted by this method as it is
performed at a low temperature. Even though chloroform is known as a toxic and carcinogenic
agent, it helps to denature all the enzymes within microbes and stops further chemical reactions.
However, appropriate precautions need to be undertaken while using this method to avoid the
hazardous effects of chloroform. In addition, it is a laborious and time-consuming method, and the
buffers also may cause problems for different analytical techniques [9]. However, a very good
recovery of phosphorylated and thermo-labile compounds was obtained from this method [18].
6.1.4. Hot Water
Hot water has been used for the extraction of bacterial amino acids since 1950s [96]. Later on,
some other researchers also applied this technique for the extraction microbial metabolites, but poor
recovery was obtained for the targeted metabolites [97]. However, Hiller, Franco-Lara and
Weuster-Botz [82] published a detailed protocol where they achieved excellent recovery and
reproducibility for the intracellular metabolites from E. coli using pre-heated de-ionized hot water
(95 °C, 5 min). This method is advantageous because it is very simple and easy to perform. In
addition, enzyme activity is more likely to stop because of the high temperature of the water.
However, this method can only extract polar metabolites and is not suitable for thermo-labile
metabolites.
6.1.5. Acidic Extraction
The extraction of intracellular metabolites using acids (e.g., perchloric acid, trichloroacetic acid
and hydrochloric acid) is one the classical methods that has been used for many years. This method
is proved to be a good one for polar and acid-stable metabolites and has been used for the extraction
of intracellular metabolites from bacteria, yeasts and filamentous fungi [17,18,38,74,84]. The
extraction process is usually performed at a low temperature (0–4 °C) and a freeze-thaw cycle is also
generally used to enhance the extraction process. However, the pH of the sample needs be
neutralized after extraction is completed. The acidic extraction method showed excellent recovery of
amines and polyamines, but poor recovery was reported for other metabolites. Moreover, the
reduced metabolites might be oxidized during the extraction and there might be hydrolysis of
proteins and polymers [9].
6.1.6. Alkaline Extraction
Alkalis are mainly used for the extraction of intracellular metabolites from yeast and
filamentous fungi. This extraction process is also carried out at a low temperature (0–4 °C) coupled
with a freeze–thaw cycle. This is an excellent method to disrupt the microbial cell wall that
deactivates enzymes promptly at extreme high pH. However, there are a few drawbacks to this
method, which include poor recovery of intracellular metabolites, saponification of lipids and

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

16 of 20

hydrolysis of proteins and polymers [18,51]. Once again, a neutralization step is required to adjust
the pH, which causes the production of salts that are removed from the sample by centrifugation [9].
6.2. Mechanical Disruption of Cell Walls
Although many mechanical cell-disruption protocols (e.g., ultrasonics, microwave, French
press and grinding) are widely used to extract the metabolites from plant and animal cells, these are
not preferred methods for the extraction of microbial intracellular metabolites. However, two
methods, such as supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) and pressurized liquid extraction (PLE) have
been used for the extraction of intracellular metabolites from some microorganisms. We will briefly
discuss their application to microbial systems in following sub-sections.
6.2.1. Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE)
SFE allows the extraction of non-polar to mid-polar compounds from bacteria, yeast and
filamentous fungi [86]. This method usually makes use of carbon dioxide as a supercritical fluid for
the extraction of intracellular metabolites. Sometimes, nitrous oxide and xenon are also used.
Moreover, methanol or ethanol is also added in addition to carbon dioxide as a modifier so that
polar compounds can also be extracted from the microorganisms [88]. This is a fast method that
requires a small amount of solvents and samples. In addition, this method can be automated and
coupled to analytical instruments, such as gas chromatograph and mass spectrometer. However, as
SFE works under high pressure, labile metabolites might be decomposed.
6.2.2. Pressurized Liquid Extraction (PLE)
PLE is mainly used for the extraction of secondary metabolites produced by the
microorganisms. However, this method has not been used by many researchers in the field of
metabolomics. But this method is suitable for high-throughput screening and very concentrated
metabolite extracts can be obtained [91]. On the other hand, only thermostable metabolites can be
extracted using PLE [9].
7. Conclusions
Quenching is certainly one of the most crucial steps in metabolomics studies. An efficient
quenching method for microbial cultures must be fast, reproducible, and it must prevent leakage of
intracellular metabolites to the extracellular medium. Several quenching methods have been
developed to date; however, each method shows a considerable specificity to the organism under
study and the culture medium in use (e.g., liquid medium, agar plates or natural substrates).
Recently, very efficient fully automated systems have been developed to increase the sampling
speed and reduce the variability introduced by human errors. However, they are mostly
purpose-made and not commercially available. There is a need for more robust quenching methods
and also more accessible equipment, which may be achieved by merging the knowledge of
specialists from distinct fields, such as biology, chemistry and engineering.
The standardization of analytical protocols and extraction methods is the most discussed topic
among members of the metabololomics community. These discussions over the last decade make it
clear that no single analytical technique is sufficient to determine the comprehensive metabolite
profiles from biological samples; rather, a combination of different techniques has been suggested
for acquiring as much information as possible. Similarly, recent work from different laboratories also
raises general consciousness about the necessity of a global (and standard) extraction protocol that
can be used to extract as many metabolites as possible. If that is not realistic or not achievable, then
the combination of extraction methods by using solvents with different polarities would be very
useful for obtaining global and more accurate intracellular metabolite profiles from microorganisms.
In this way, we would be able to achieve a more precise biological interpretation of the
metabolomics data.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

17 of 20

Acknowledgments: F.R.P received funding from the Agricultural and Marketing Research and Development
Trust (AGMARDT; contract number A16017).
Author Contributions: Farhana R. Pinu and Silas G. Villas-Boas conceived the idea; Raphael Aggio, and
Farhana R. Pinu wrote and revised the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

Fiehn, O. Metabolomics-the link between genotypes and phenotypes. Plant Mol. Biol. 2002, 48, 155–171.
Bino, R.J.; Hall, R.D.; Fiehn, O.; Kopka, J.; Saito, K.; Draper, J.; Nikolau, B.J.; Mendes, P.; Roessner-Tunali, U.;
Beale, M.H.; et al. Potential of metabolomics as a functional genomics tool. Trends Plant Sci. 2004, 9, 418–425.
Wishart, D.S.; Mandal, R.; Stanislaus, A.; Ramirez-Gaona, M. Cancer metabolomics and the human
metabolome database. Metabolites 2016, 6, doi:10.3390/metabo6010010.
Whitfield, P.D.; German, A.J.; Noble, P.J.M. Metabolomics: An emerging post-genomic tool for nutrition.
Br. J. Nutr. 2004, 92, 549–555.
Wishart, D.S. Emerging applications of metabolomics in drug discovery and precision medicine. Nat. Rev.
Drug Discov. 2016, 15, 473–484.
Aggio, R.B.M.; Obolonkin, V.; Villas-Boas, S.G. Sonic vibration affects the metabolism of yeast cells
growing in liquid culture: A metabolomic study. Metabolomics 2012, 8, 670–678.
Patejko, M.; Jacyna, J.; Markuszewski, M.J. Sample preparation procedures utilized in microbial
metabolomics: An overview. J. Chromatogr. B 2017, 1043, 150–157.
Van der Werf, M.J. Metabolomics: A revolutionary tool to optimize microbial processes. Abstr. Pap. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2003, 226, U84–U84.
Villas-Boas, S.G.; Roeseener, U.; Hansen, M.A.E.; Smedsgaard, J.; Nielsen, J. Metabolomics Analysis: An
Introduction; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2007.
Canelas, A.B.; Ras, C.; ten Pierick, A.; van Dam, J.C.; Heijnen, J.J.; Van Gulik, W.M. Leakage-free rapid
quenching technique for yeast metabolomics. Metabolomics 2008, 4, 226–239.
Da Luz, J.A.; Hans, E.; Zeng, A.P. Automated fast filtration and on-filter quenching improve the
intracellular metabolite analysis of microorganisms. Eng. Life Sci. 2014, 14, 135–142.
Canelas, A.B.; ten Pierick, A.; Ras, C.; Seifar, R.M.; van Dam, J.C.; van Gulik, W.M.; Heijnen, J.J.
Quantitative evaluation of intracellular metabolite extraction techniques for yeast metabolomics. Anal.
Chem. 2009, 81, 7379–7389.
Bolten, C.J.; Kiefer, P.; Letisse, F.; Portais, J.-C.; Wittmann, C. Sampling for metabolome analysis of
microorganisms. Anal. Chem. 2007, 79, 3843–3849.
Van Gulik, W.M.; Canelas, A.B.; Taymaz-Nikerel, H.; Douma, R.D.; de Jonge, L.P.; Heijnen, J.J. Fast
sampling of the cellular metabolome. Method. Mol. Biol. 2012, 881, 279–306.
Baidoo, E.E.K.; Benke, P.I.; Keasling, J.D. Mass spectrometry-based microbial metabolomics. Method. Mol.
Biol. 2012, 881, 215–278.
Buchholz, A.; Hurlebaus, J.; Wandrey, C.; Takors, R. Metabolomics: Quantification of intracellular
metabolite dynamics. Biomol. Eng. 2002, 19, 5–15.
Hajjaj, H.; Blanc, P.J.; Goma, G.; Francois, J. Sampling techniques and comparative extraction procedures
for quantitative determination of intra- and extracellular metabolites in filamentous fungi. Fems Microbiol.
Lett. 1998, 164, 195–200.
Villas-Boas, S.G.; Hojer-Pedersen, J.; Akesson, M.; Smedsgaard, J.; Nielsen, J. Global metabolite analysis of
yeast: Evaluation of sample preparation methods. Yeast 2005, 22, 1155–1169.
Behrends, V.; Williams, H.D.; Bundy, J.G. Metabolic footprinting: Extracellular metabolomic analysis.
Method. Mol. Biol. 2014, 1149, 281–292.
Mo, M.L.; Palsson, B.O.; Herrgard, M.J. Connecting extracellular metabolomic measurements to
intracellular flux states in yeast. BMC Syst. Biol. 2009, 3, 17.
Villas-Boas, S.G.; Bruheim, P. Cold glycerol-saline: The promising quenching solution for accurate
intracellular metabolite analysis of microbial cells. Anal. Biochem. 2007, 370, 87–97.
Huang, K.C.; Mukhopadhyay, R.; Wen, B.N.; Gitai, Z.; Wingreen, N.S. Cell shape and cell-wall
organization in gram-negative bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2008, 105, 19282–19287.
Bartholomew, J.W.; Mittwer, T. The gram stain. Bacteriol. Rev. 1952, 16, 1–29.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

47.
48.

18 of 20

Northcote, D.H.; Goulding, K.J.; Horne, R.W. Chemical composition and structure of the cell wall of
hydrodictyon-africanum yaman. Biochem. J. 1960, 77, 503.
Lipke, P.N.; Ovalle, R. Cell wall architecture in yeast: New structure and new challenges. J. Bacteriol. 1998,
180, 3735–3740.
Bowman, S.M.; Free, S.J. The structure and synthesis of the fungal cell wall. Bioessays 2006, 28, 799–808.
VanWinkleSwift, K.P.; Rickoll, W.L. The zygospore wall of chlamydomonas monoica (chlorophyceae):
Morphogenesis and evidence for the presence of sporopollenin. J. Phycol. 1997, 33, 655–665.
Damiani, M.C.; Leonardi, P.I.; Pieroni, O.I.; Caceres, E.J. Ultrastructure of the cyst wall of haematococcus
pluvialis (chlorophyceae): Wall development and behaviour during cyst germination. Phycologia 2006, 45,
616–623.
Imam, S.H.; Buchanan, M.J.; Shin, H.C.; Snell, W.J. The chlamydomonas cell-wall-characterization of the
wall framework. J. Cell Biol. 1985, 101, 1599–1607.
Wang, Y.; Cai, J.; Jiang, Y.G.; Jiang, X.G.; Zhang, D.Y. Preparation of biosilica structures from frustules of
diatoms and their applications: Current state and perspectives. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2013, 97, 453–460.
Svensen, O.; Frette, O.; Erga, S.R. Scattering properties of microalgae: The effect of cell size and cell wall.
Appl. Opt. 2007, 46, 5762–5769.
Lemgruber, L.; Lupetti, P.; De Souza, W.; Vommaro, R.C.; da Rocha-Azevedo, B. The fine structure of the
acanthamoeba polyphaga cyst wall. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2010, 305, 170–176.
Naderer, T.; McConville, M.J. The leishmania-macrophage interaction: A metabolic perspective. Cell
Microbiol. 2008, 10, 301–308.
Harrison, D.E.; Maitra, P. Role of ATP in control of energy metabolism in growing bacteria. J. Gen.
Microbiol. 1968, 53, Suppl. S7–S8.
Weibel, K.E.; Mor, J.R.; Fiechter, A. Rapid sampling of yeast-cells and automated assays of adenylate,
citrate, pyruvate and glucose-6-phosphate pools. Anal. Biochem. 1974, 58, 208–216.
Wollenberger, A.; Ristau, O.; Schoffa, G. Eine einfache technik der extrem schnellen abkuhlung grosserer
gewebestucke. Pflug. Arch. Eur. J. Physiol. 1960, 270, 399–412.
Visser, D.; van Zuylen, G.A.; van Dam, J.C.; Oudshoorn, A.; Eman, M.R.; Ras, C.; van Gulik, W.M.; Frank,
J.; van Dedem, G.W.K.; Heijnen, J.J. Rapid sampling for analysis of in vivo kinetics using the bioscope: A
system for continuous-pulse experiments. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2002, 79, 674–681.
Faijes, M.; Mars, A.E.; Smid, E.J. Comparison of quenching and extraction methodologies for metabolome
analysis of lactobacillus plantarum. Microb. Cell Factories 2007, 6, doi:10.1186/1475-2859-6-27.
De Jonge, L.P.; Douma, R.D.; Heijnen, J.J.; van Gulik, W.M. Optimization of cold methanol quenching for
quantitative metabolomics of penicillium chrysogenum. Metabolomics 2012, 8, 727–735.
Gonzalez, B.; Francois, J.; Renaud, M. A rapid and reliable method for metabolite extraction in yeast using
boiling buffered ethanol. Yeast 1997, 13, 1347–1355.
Wittmann, C.; Kromer, J.O.; Kiefer, P.; Binz, T.; Heinzle, E. Impact of the cold shock phenomenon on
quantification of intracellular metabolites in bacteria. Anal. Biochem. 2004, 327, 135–139.
Franzen, J.S.; Binkley, S.B. Comparison of acid-soluble nucleotides in Escherichia-coli at different growth
rates. J. Biol. Chem. 1961, 236, 515–519.
Cole, H.A.; Wimpenny, J.W.; Hughes, D.E. ATP pool in Escherichia coli. I. Measurement of pool using a
modified luciferase assay. Biochim. Et Biophys. Acta 1967, 143, 445–453.
Strange, R.E.; Wade, H.E.; Dark, F.A. Effect of starvation on adenosine triphosphate concentration in
aerobacter aerogenes. Nature 1963, 199, 55–58.
Williamson, D.H.; Lund, P.; Krebs, H.A. Redox state of free nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide in
cytoplasm and mitochondria of rat liver. Biochem. J. 1967, 103, 514.
Faupel, R.P.; Seitz, H.J.; Tarnowski, W.; Thiemann, V.; Weiss, C. Problem of tissue sampling from
experimental-animals with respect to freezing technique, anoxia, stress and narcosis-new method for
sampling rat-liver tissue and physiological values of glycolytic intermediates and related compounds.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 1972, 148, 509–522.
Saez, M.J.; Lagunas, R. Determination of intermediary metabolites in yeast-critical-examination of effect of
sampling conditions and recommendations for obtaining true levels. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 1976, 13, 73–78.
Ruijter, G.J.G.; Visser, J. Determination of intermediary metabolites in Aspergillus niger. J. Microbiol. Methods
1996, 25, 295–302.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

49.
50.

51.
52.
53.

54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.

68.
69.

70.
71.

72.

19 of 20

Dekoning, W.; Vandam, K. A method for the determination of changes of glycolytic metabolites in yeast on
a subsecond time scale using extraction at neutral ph. Anal. Biochem. 1992, 204, 118–123.
Moritz, B.; Striegel, K.; de Graaf, A.A.; Sahm, H. Kinetic properties of the glucose-6-phosphate and
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenases from corynebacterium glutamicum and their application for
predicting pentose phosphate pathway flux in vivo. Eur. J. Biochem. 2000, 267, 3442–3452.
Maharjan, R.P.; Ferenci, T. Global metabolite analysis: The influence of extraction methodology on
metabolome profiles of Escherichia coli. Anal. Biochem. 2003, 313, 145–154.
Tredwell, G.D.; Edwards-Jones, B.; Leak, D.J.; Bundy, J.G. The development of metabolomic sampling
procedures for Pichia pastoris, and baseline metabolome data. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, 16.
Jensen, N.B.S.; Jokumsen, K.V.; Villadsen, J. Determination of the phosphorylated sugars of the
Embden-Meyerhoff-Parnas pathway in Lactococcus lactis using a fast sampling technique and solid phase
extraction. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1999, 63, 356–362.
Chassagnole, C.; Noisommit-Rizzi, N.; Schmid, J.W.; Mauch, K.; Reuss, M. Dynamic modeling of the
central carbon metabolism of Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2002, 79, 53–73.
Japelt, K.B.; Christensen, J.H.; Villas-Boas, S.G. Metabolic fingerprinting of Lactobacillus paracasei: The
optimal quenching strategy. Microb. Cell Factories 2015, 14, 10.
Bolling, C.; Fiehn, O. Metabolite profiling of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii under nutrient deprivation. Plant
Physiol. 2005, 139, 1995–2005.
De Souza, D.P.; Saunders, E.C.; McConville, M.J.; Likic, V.A. Progressive peak clustering in GC-MS
metabolomic experiments applied to leishmania parasites. Bioinformatics 2006, 22, 1391–1396.
Smart, K.F.; Aggio, R.B.M.; Van Houtte, J.R.; Villas-Boas, S.G. Analytical platform for metabolome analysis
of microbial cells using methyl chloroformate derivatization followed by gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry. Nat. Protoc. 2010, 5, 1709–1729.
Leder, I.G. Interrelated effects of cold shock and osmotic pressure on the permeability of the Escherichia coli
membrane to permease accumulated substrates. J. Bacteriol. 1972, 111, 406–415.
Britten, R.J.; McClure, F.T. Amino acid pool in Escherichia-coli. Bacteriol. Rev. 1962, 26, 292.
Smeaton, J.R.; Elliott, W.H. Selective release of ribonuclease-inhibitor from Bacillus subtilis cells by cold
shock treatment. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1967, 26, 75–81.
Carnicer, M.; Canelas, A.B.; ten Pierick, A.; Zeng, Z.; van Dam, J.; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P.; Heijnen, J.J.;
van Gulik, W. Development of quantitative metabolomics for Pichia pastoris. Metabolomics 2012, 8, 284–298.
Link, H.; Fuhrer, T.; Gerosa, L.; Zamboni, N.; Sauer, U. Real-time metabolome profiling of the metabolic
switch between starvation and growth. Nat. Methods 2015, 12, 1091–1097.
Theobald, U.; Mailinger, W.; Reuss, M.; Rizzi, M. In vivo analysis of glucose-induced fast changes in yeast
adenine-nucleotide pool applying a rapid sampling technique. Anal. Biochem. 1993, 214, 31–37.
Larsson, G.; Tornkvist, M. Rapid sampling, cell inactivation and evaluation of low extracellular glucose
concentrations during fed-batch cultivation. J. Biotechnol. 1996, 49, 69–82.
Schaefer, U.; Boos, W.; Takors, R.; Weuster-Botz, D. Automated sampling device for monitoring
intracellular metabolite dynamics. Anal. Biochem. 1999, 270, 88–96.
Bhattacharya, M.; Fuhrman, L.; Ingram, A.; Nickerson, K.W.; Conway, T. Single-run separation and detection
of multiple metabolic intermediates by anion-exchange high-performance liquid-chromatography and
application to cell pool extracts prepared from Escherichia-coli. Anal. Biochem. 1995, 232, 98–106.
Schaub, J.; Schiesling, C.; Reuss, M.; Dauner, M. Integrated sampling procedure for metabolome analysis.
Biotechnol. Prog. 2006, 22, 1434–1442.
Lange, H.C.; Eman, M.; van Zuijlen, G.; Visser, D.; van Dam, J.C.; Frank, J.; de Mattos, M.J.T.; Heijnen, J.J.
Improved rapid sampling for in vivo kinetics of intracellular metabolites in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2001, 75, 406–415.
Van Gulik, W.M. Fast sampling for quantitative microbial metabolomics. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2010, 21,
27–34.
Buziol, S.; Bashir, I.; Baumeister, A.; Claassen, W.; Noisommit-Rizzi, N.; Mailinger, W.; Reuss, M. New
bioreactor-coupled rapid stopped-flow sampling technique for measurements of metabolite dynamics on
a subsecond time scale. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2002, 80, 632–636.
Mashego, M.R.; van Gulik, W.M.; Vinke, J.L.; Visser, D.; Heijnen, J.J. In vivo kinetics with rapid
perturbation experiments in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using a second-generation bioscope. Metab. Eng. 2006,
8, 370–383.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

73.
74.
75.
76.

77.
78.
79.

80.
81.

82.
83.
84.

85.
86.

87.

88.
89.
90.
91.

92.

93.
94.
95.

20 of 20

Duportet, X.; Aggio, R.B.M.; Carneiro, S.; Villas-Boas, S.G. The biological interpretation of metabolomic
data can be misled by the extraction method used. Metabolomics 2012, 8, 410–421.
Park, C.; Yun, S.; Lee, S.Y.; Park, K.; Lee, J. Metabolic profiling of Klebsiella oxytoca: Evaluation of methods for
extraction of intracellular metabolites using UPLC/Q-TOF-MS. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2012, 167, 425–438.
Kim, S.; Lee, D.Y.; Wohlgemuth, G.; Park, H.S.; Fiehn, O.; Kim, K.H. Evaluation and optimization of
metabolome sample preparation methods for Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 2169–2176.
Groussac, E.; Ortiz, M.; Francois, J. Improved protocols for quantitative determination of metabolites from
biological samples using high performance ionic-exchange chromatography with conductimetric and
pulsed amperometric detection. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2000, 26, 715–723.
Hans, M.A.; Heinzle, E.; Wittmann, C. Quantification of intracellular amino acids in batch cultures of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2001, 56, 776–779.
Jernejc, K. Comparison of different methods for metabolite extraction from Aspergillus niger mycelium.
Acta Chim. Slov. 2004, 51, 567–578.
El Rammouz, R.; Letisse, F.; Durand, S.; Portais, J.-C.; Moussa, Z.W.; Fernandez, X. Analysis of skeletal
muscle metabolome: Evaluation of extraction methods for targeted metabolite quantification using liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Anal. Biochem. 2010, 398, 169–177.
Bolten, C.J.; Wittmann, C. Appropriate sampling for intracellular amino acid analysis in five
phylogenetically different yeasts. Biotechnol. Lett. 2008, 30, 1993–2000.
Li, X.; Long, D.; Ji, J.; Yang, W.; Zeng, Z.; Guo, S.; Ji, Z.; Qi, G.; Chen, S. Sample preparation for the
metabolomics investigation of poly-gamma-glutamate-producing bacillus licheniformis by GC-MS. J.
Microbiol. Methods 2013, 94, 61–67.
Villas-Boas, S.G.; Moxley, J.F.; Akesson, M.; Stephanopoulos, G.; Nielsen, J. High-throughput metabolic
state analysis: The missing link in integrated functional genomics of yeasts. Biochem. J. 2005, 388, 669–677.
Hiller, J.; Franco-Lara, E.; Weuster-Botz, D. Metabolic profiling of Escherichia coli cultivations: Evaluation of
extraction and metabolite analysis procedures. Biotechnol. Lett. 2007, 29, 1169–1178.
Mei, H.; Dai, J.; Liu, W.-W.; Ling, X.; Zhu, P.-F.; Zhao, Z.-J. Comparison of extraction methods for E. coli
metabolome analysis using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Chin. J. Anal. Chem. 2011,
39, 534–539.
Abdullah, M.I.; Young, J.C.; Games, D.E. Supercritical-fluid extraction of carboxylic and fatty-acids from
Agaricus spp. mushrooms. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1994, 42, 718–722.
Cocks, S.; Wrigley, S.K.; Chicarellirobinson, M.I.; Smith, R.M. High-performance liquid-chromatography
comparison of supercritical-fluid extraction and solvent-extraction of microbial fermentation products. J.
Chromatogr. A 1995, 697, 115–122.
Gharaibeh, A.A.; Voorhees, K.J. Characterization of lipid fatty acids in whole-cell microorganisms using in
situ supercritical fluid derivatization/extraction and gas chromatography mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem.
1996, 68, 2805–2810.
Lim, G.B.; Lee, S.Y.; Lee, E.K.; Haam, S.J.; Kim, W.S. Separation of astaxanthin from red yeast Phaffia
rhodozyma by supercritical carbon dioxide extraction. Biochem. Eng. J. 2002, 11, 181–187.
Smith, R.M. Before the injection-modern methods of sample preparation for separation techniques. J.
Chromatogr. A 2003, 1000, 3–27.
Khosravi-Darani, K.; Vasheghani-Farahani, E. Application of supercritical fluid extraction in
biotechnology. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 2005, 25, 231–242.
Gomez-Ariza, J.L.; de la Torre, M.A.C.; Giraldez, I.; Morales, E. Speciation analysis of selenium
compounds in yeasts using pressurised liquid extraction and liquid chromatography-microwave-assisted
digestion-hydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometry. Anal. Chim. Acta 2004, 524, 305–314.
Rodriguez-Meizoso, I.; Jaime, L.; Santoyo, S.; Cifuentes, A.; Reina, G.G.-B.; Senorans, F.J.; Ibanez, E.
Pressurized fluid extraction of bioactive compounds from phormidium species. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2008,
56, 3517–3523.
Marcinowska, R.; Trygg, J.; Wolf-Watz, H.; Mortiz, T.; Surowiec, I. Optimization of a sample preparation
method for the metabolomic analysis of clinically relevant bacteria. J. Microbiol. Methods 2011, 87, 24–31.
Entian, K.D.; Zimmermann, F.K.; Scheel, I. A partial defect in carbon catabolite repression in mutants of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae with reduced hexose phosphyorylation. Mol. Gen. Genet. MGG 1977, 156, 99–105.
Folch, J.; Lees, M.; Sloane Stanley, G.H. A simple method for the isolation and purification of total lipides
from animal tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 1957, 226, 497–509.

Metabolites 2017, 7, 53

96.

97.

21 of 20

Gale, E.F. The assimilation of amino-acids by bacteria; the passage of certain amino-acids across the cell
wall and their concentration in the internal environment of Streptococcus faecalis. J. Gen. Microbiol. 1947, 1,
53–76.
Bagnara, A.S.; Finch, L.R. Quantitative extraction and estimation of intracellular nucleoside triphosphates
of Escherichia coli. Anal. Biochem. 1972, 45, 24–34.
© 2017 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

