NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Mol Biosyst. 2012 February ; 8(2): 470–481. doi:10.1039/c1mb05350g.

LC-MS-based metabolomics
Bin Zhou, Jun Feng Xiao, Leepika Tuli, and Habtom W. Ressom
Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, 4000 Reservoir Rd., NW,
Washington, DC 20057, USA. Fax: 202-687-0227; Tel: 202-687-2283
Habtom W. Ressom: hwr@georgetown.edu

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Metabolomics aims at identification and quantitation of small molecules involved in metabolic
reactions. LC-MS has enjoyed a growing popularity as the platform for metabolomic studies due
to its high throughput, soft ionization, and good coverage of metabolites. The success of LC-MSbased metabolomic study often depends on multiple experimental, analytical, and computational
steps. This review presents a workflow of a typical LC-MS-based metabolomic analysis for
identification and quantitation of metabolites indicative of biological/environmental perturbations.
Challenges and current solutions in each step of the workflow are reviewed. The review intends to
help investigators understand the challenges in metabolomic studies and to determine appropriate
experimental, analytical, and computational methods to address these challenges.

1. Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Metabolomics is the comprehensive analysis of all metabolites in a biological system 1. It
complements transcriptomics and proteomics as it provides a quantitative assessment of low
molecular weight analytes (<1800Da) that define the metabolic status of a biological system.
Another related term, “metabonomics” was coined by Nicholson et. al 2 to represent studies
of changes in metabolic activities in response to patho-physiological stimuli or genetic
modifications. However, both terms overlap by a large degree in practice especially within
the field of human disease research and they are often in effect synonymous 3. Metabolomic
investigations have been applied in various research areas including environmental and
biological stress studies, functional genomics, biomarker discovery, and integrative systems
biology 4, 5. Those studies facilitate understandings of biochemical fluxes and discoveries of
metabolites which are indicative of unusual biological or environmental perturbations.
Metabolic analysis is typically categorized as two complementary methods: targeted and
untargeted. Targeted approach focuses on identifying and quantifying selected metabolites
(or metabolite classes), such as substrates of an enzyme, direct products of a protein, a
particular class of compound or members of a particular pathway. In the targeted approach,
the chemical properties of the investigated compounds are known, and sample preparation
can be tailored to reduce matrix effects and interference from accompanying compounds.
While targeted approach is usually hypothesis-driven, untargeted analysis can generate new
hypothesis for further tests by measuring (ideally) all the metabolites of a biological system.
In Fig. 1, a typical workflow of a metabolomic study using liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) based platform is presented. The workflow aims at comparing
multiple biological groups to identify metabolites that are significantly altered. It starts with
an untargeted analysis to screen potential and putative metabolites of interest. These

Correspondence to: Habtom W. Ressom, hwr@georgetown.edu.
B. Zhou, J. F. Xiao, and L. Tuli share the first authorship;

Zhou et al.

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

metabolites are then subjected to a targeted analysis for metabolite ID verification,
quantitation, functional interpretation, and pathway analysis. Various experimental,
analytical, and computational steps in the workflow are discussed below, with an emphasis
on the untargeted analysis.

2. Experimental design
Experimental design includes considerations on (1) experimental type (e.g., time series, case
vs. control, gene mutation, etc.); (2) experimental factors (e.g., time, dose, or genetic
variation, etc.); (3) experimental comparisons (e.g., against a standard reference sample or
between samples, etc.). Series of guidelines that are specific for each type of experiments
have been published in order to formulate a minimal set and a best practice set of reporting
standards for metabolomic studies 6–8. Readers can follow their interests to look into the
details in each guideline.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One important aspect of experiment design is to determine how many biological replicates
are needed for a study to have the desired statistical power. In the proposed minimum
reporting standard for chemistry analysis in metabolomic study 9, it was suggested that a
minimum of three biological replicates is required and five replicates preferred. It is also
useful to conduct a pilot study to evaluate LC-MS data variation under specific experimental
conditions. The results from the pilot study can then be used to guide subsequent
experiments. In addition, since homogeneous quality control (QC) samples are generally
recommended to be included throughout the experiment 10, the variation estimated using QC
samples can also be utilized to retrospectively evaluate the statistical power of an
experiment. A proper experimental design for metabolomic investigations also includes
analytical replicates, blanks, negative and positive controls to infer analytical and biological
variations and assess data quality.

3. Sample collection and handling

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Sample collection and sample handling are of critical influence on experimental
reproducibility. Recent studies have evaluated the impact of sample handling and storage on
metabolite composition 11–13. Results from these studies indicated that consistent sample
handling as well as prompt storage of samples minimize the variability in the later analysis
and ensure the quality of data. Some of the suggested guidelines from proteomics studies on
biofluids 14 are also applicable to metabolomic investigations 15. These guidelines include:
sample storage at −80°C or in liquid nitrogen to avoid metabolite degradation and minimize
freeze-thawing cycle to avoid degradation or formation of metabolites. Additionally, for
biofluid collection, factors such as the type of syringe, vacuum system/vacutainer for blood
collection, storage vessel, anticoagulant, temperature, velocity, duration of centrifugation
should be considered.
For tissue sample harvesting and processing, several methods are available including
lyophilization, pulverization/homogenization, tissue cell lysis (e.g. liquid N2 grinding,
manual or electric homogenization, and ultrasonic cell lysis). Other factors that affect the
quality of samples include sample freezing methods, sample wash method, time, duration for
tissue collection, etc. To inhibit metabolism in cell, plant tissue, and animal tissue samples,
shock quenching and shock freezing are two commonly used methods. However for samples
such as yeast or microbial, the sample quenching remains a difficult issue 16, 17.

4. Metabolite extraction
The chemical diversities in the metabolome and dynamic nature of metabolite turnover
make metabolite extraction a challenging task. Matrix interference and sample loss often
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 3

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

occur during this step. Balancing between the minimal matrix interference and maximum
sample recovery, many efforts have been made to optimize the extraction protocols for
target metabolites or the entire metabolome 15, 18. These protocols can vary and often
depend on the sample types and objectives of the study. For example, extraction of highabundance metabolites can be often achieved with good recoveries, whereas extraction of
low-abundance metabolites requires enrichment for better detection. The enzymatic
activities in cell and tissue samples often require careful sample quenching and stringent
controlling during the extraction, in which analyte standards or isotope-labeled internal
standards are spiked into samples to determine the metabolite recoveries and to test the
absence of enzymatic activities or the extent of metabolite degradation 19. Unbiased
metabolites extraction methods include liquid-liquid extraction (LLE), solid-liquid
extraction (SLE), solid phase extraction (SPE), microwave assisted extraction, accelerated
solvent extraction, protein precipitation, etc, among which LLE, SLE and SPE are the three
most common ones.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

During LLE, choice of the solvents depends on the chemical properties of metabolites. A
particular solvent can extract metabolites of the same chemical class. For a specific study,
researchers are recommended to test several extraction methods, compare their performance
in metabolites recovery, extraction specificity, and efficiency to determine the most
appropriate method for their study. The choice of solvents should also consider their
compatibility with analytical instruments. In SLE, sample preparation needs to be optimized
to avoid degradation or modification of metabolites caused by extraction conditions or
enzymatic activities in tissue samples. Multiple solvent extractions or further sample
grinding are often needed to recover the metabolites to the maximum extent since the solid
sample matrix may still contain some compounds after the first extraction step.
SPE could work as an efficient method to extract the sample and remove interfering
substances (e.g. salts or abundant metabolites). It is observed that retaining low abundant
compounds on the solid phase of SPE is a good enrichment strategy 20. Several solid phase
sorbents are available such as silica, alkylated silica (C-18), carbon based sorbents, ionexchange materials, polymer materials and RAM (restricted access materials) that comprise
the three most common chromatographic separation modes: normal phase, reverse phase and
ion-exchange. SPE has been applied to metabolomic investigations in various studies
including screening of serotonin and its precursor tryptophans in human platelet rich
plasma 21, screening of hetrocyclic amines and metabolites in rat urine 22, 23, metabolite
profiling in animal tissues 24 and in plant samples 25.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Readers are encouraged to refer to the literatures for a detailed description on the extraction
techniques available for metabolomic studies 22, 26, 27.

5. LC-MS-based metabolomic data acquisition
Once the metabolites are extracted, metabolomic data are acquired using specific analytical
technologies. In this review, we focus on LC-MS based analytical platforms.
LC-MS is a coupling of liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. A mass spectrometer
is typically composed of three major parts: ion source, mass analyzer, and detector. While
the ion source converts sample molecules into ions, the mass analyzer resolves these ions
either in a time-of-flight tube or an electromagnetic field before they are measured by the
detector. Several options are available for ion sources including electrospray ionization
(ESI), atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI), atmospheric pressure
photoionization (APPI), and fast atom bombardment (FAB). Due to the diverse chemical
properties of metabolites, it is often required to analyze the biological sample in both +ve
(positive) and −ve (negative) ionization modes under scan range of m/z 50–1000 to
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

maximize metabolome coverage. ESI is by far the method of choice in LC–MS-based
metabolomic studies, because its “soft ionization” capability produces a large number of
ions through charge exchange in solution and often forms intact molecular ions which aid
initial identification. APCI and APPI also typically induce little or no in-source
fragmentation and are considered relatively tolerant to high buffer concentrations. These
ionization approaches are complimentary to ESI for the analysis of non-polar and thermally
stable compounds such as lipids. Ranges of applicability of APPI, APCI and ESI in terms of
molecular weight and compound polarity are summarized in the Fig. 2. Nowadays
instruments with dual ionization capabilities (e.g. ESI and APCI, or ESI and APPI) have
gradually become the trend, which results in an increased coverage of the metabolome.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mass analyzers can be categorized as: quadrupole (e.g. Agilent 6100 Single Quadruple;
Thermo MSQ plus;), ion trap (IT, e.g. Thermo LTQ; Bruker Dalton amazon Ion trap;
Agilent 6300 Ion trap), time-of-flight (TOF, e.g. Bruker Dalton MicrOTOF; AB Sciex
Triple TOF; Agilent Accurate mass TOF), Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) and Fourier
transform ion cyclotron (FTICR, e.g. Bruker Apex FTICR; Thermo Scientific FT Ultra).
Hybrid or tandem mass spectrometers refer to the combination of two or more analyzers.
Modern high resolution mass spectrometers (HRMS), such as FTICR, Orbitrap, and TOF
can provide accurate mass measurements to facilitate metabolite identification and also
provide accurate metabolite quantitation. In addition to resolving ions by their m/z values
and obtaining estimates of their molecular masses, mass analyzers can further aid metabolite
identification by acquiring highly resolved and accurate MS/MS spectra. This is achieved
through ion fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID) in either quadrupolebased tandem in-space instruments such as triple quadrupole (QqQ, e.g. AB 5000 API QQQ;
Agilent 6430 triple quadrupole; Thermo TSQ Quantumn /Vantage; Shimazhu LC-MS-8030
Triple Quadruple), quadrupole TOF (QTOF, e.g. Waters XEVO G2 QTOF; AB QSTAR
Elite; Agilent 6540 accurate mass QTOF; Bruker micrOTOF-Q II), or ion trap-based tandem
in-time instruments such as quadrupole-ion trap (QIT, e.g. AB QTRAP 4000), ion trap-TOF
(IT-TOF, e.g. Shimazhu LCMS IT-TOF), LTQ-Orbitrap and LTQ-FTICR. Table 1 has
summarized the performance of modern mass analyzers (parameters are from
reference 28–30).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Most metabolomic studies use a separation method before mass spectrometric analysis. High
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), as a versatile separation method, allows
separation of compounds of a wide range of polarity through either isocratic elution (the
water-solvent composition remains constant during the separation) or a gradient elution (the
water-solvent composition changes during the separation). Acetonitrile, methanol and
tetrahydrofuran (THF) are the most common used organic solvents. Isocratic elution is
preferred for simple samples (i.e. less than 10 components). Gradient elution provides an
overall faster analysis, narrower peaks and similar resolution compared to isocratic
elution 31.
LC-ESI-MS is becoming a method of choice for profiling metabolites in complex biological
samples 32. Chromatographic separation can reduce sample complexity and alleviate matrix
effects during ionization. In LC-ESI-MS, reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC),
normally using C18 columns, can separate semi-polar compounds such as phenolic acids,
flavonoids, glycosylated steroids, alkaloids, and other glycosylated species. Hydrophilic
interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) can use columns, such as aminopropyl columns
to separate polar compounds like sugars, amino sugars, amino acids, vitamins, carboxylic
acids, and nucleotides etc. For separation of basic and acidic metabolites, ion-paring
reagents such as sodium alkanesulfonates and quaternary ammonium salts are often used in
the mobile phase (e.g. sodium 1-heptanesulfonate and tetrabutylammonium hydroxide).
Although normal phase liquid chromatography (NPLC) can also separate polar compounds,

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

the use of non-polar organic mobile phase makes it more compatible with APCI-MS instead
of ESI-MS. NPLC-APCI-MS has been applied for the analysis of non-polar lipids such as
triacylglycerols, sterols, and fatty acid esters.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Good chromatographic separation improves the sensitivity of MS detection and also results
in better MS data quality due to reduced background noise. Therefore, more efficient
separation approaches are needed to reduce the sample complexity and improve the
chromatographic resolutions of overlapping metabolites. One of such approaches is
multidimensional liquid chromatography (MDLC) that allows the combination of two or
more independent separation steps to increase the peak capacity and improve the separation
of metabolites in complex samples. MDLC examples include RPLC-HILIC, ion exchangereverse phase, size exclusion-reverse phase, and strong cation exchange-HILIC. Recent
developments in capillary monolithic chromatography, high temperature LC, and ultra
performance liquid chromatography (UPLC, i.e., pressure >400 bar in columns packed with
<2 μm diameter particles) have also achieved significant progress in chromatographic
resolution and expedited analysis 33. Meanwhile, metabolites of interest at low abundance
interfered by significant backgrounds at low mass range or having the poor ionization also
pose challenges to the sensitivity of detection by LC-ESI-MS method. Solutions to alleviate
those issues include performing adequate sample preparation prior to LC separation. For
example, adopting more selective SPE) to concentrate and purify samples, changing the
ionization mode from ESI to APCI, APPI to reduce the ionization background interference,
or performing chemical derivatization on metabolites to increase their MS signals and to
have them detected in high mass range.

6. LC-MS and MS/MS data variability
Multiple factors contribute to the variability of LC-MS data. In addition to biological
variability, which is inherent in biological studies involving multiple subjects, LC-MS data
can exhibit significant variability because of analytical reasons. Sample preparation,
instrument condition, or operation environment may introduce variations into the acquired
data. The variations include drift of retention times, alteration of intensity values, and to a
much less scale, drift of m/z values.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

To evaluate the analytical variability, it is recommended that QC samples are repeatedly
analyzed throughout the entire LC-MS experiment 10. QC samples can be aliquots of a
sample pooled from multiple subjects in an equal amount and homogeneously mixed. The
QC samples are then injected periodically throughout the experiment. By inspecting the QC
runs, one can evaluate the analytical variation using summary statistics such as coefficient of
variation (CV) or using projection methods such as principal component analysis (PCA).
The pooled sample may also be used to reduce the variability of the LC-MS data. For
example, peaks exhibiting a comparable variation within the LC-MS runs from the pooled
sample relative to the variability within the biological samples of interest in the study can be
considered unreliable and thus removed from subsequent statistical analysis.
In addition to variations in LC-MS data, variations are also seen in MS/MS spectra,
especially for data generated with different types of instruments or under different
experimental conditions. Due to different combinations of ionization source, collision
energy, mass analyzer, and detectors, the same metabolite can be represented by distinct
MS/MS spectra. For example, two MS/MS spectra from the same metabolite may vary on
the relative intensities of the peaks. In addition, some peaks may appear in only one of the
two spectra. The relatively poor reproducibility of MS/MS spectra (comparing with EI
spectra) is a major obstacle against metabolite identification using spectral matching

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 6

approaches. Database enlargement or the tuning point technique may enable MS/MS spectra
library which can accommodate different instruments 34, 35.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

7. Pre-processing of LC-MS data
To convert the raw LC-MS data into a peak list which can be easily interpreted and
compared across runs, multiple preprocessing steps need to be performed as outlined below:

Outlier Screening aims to eliminate LC-MS runs or peaks which exhibit an unacceptable
deviation from the majority of their replicates (analytical or biological). While the LC-MS
variability is unavoidable, the outlier runs/peaks with excessive amount of bias need to be
removed from the subsequent analysis. In practice, PCA is often used to identify sample
outliers by visually inspecting the 2-D (or 3-D) score plot of the data. Those runs that
deviate significantly from the majority are considered as possible outliers. R package
OutlierD uses quantile regression on MA plot to detect outlier peaks from LC-MS/MS
data 36. Schulz-Trieglaff et al. proposed another outlier detection algorithm by first
summarizing the characteristics of LC-MS raw data with 20 quality descriptors. Robust PCA
is then used to reduce the 20 descriptors to a vector of 6 dimensions, and Mahalanobis
distance is used to identify the LC-MS run outliers 37.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Filtering is used to remove the noise and contaminants from LC-MS data. Various filtering
methods such as median filtering or moving average filtering are applied to LC-MS data.
One major requirement for filtering is to suppress the noise while preserving the peaks in the
data. For example, Savitzky-Golay filter reduces the noise while keeping the peaks by
preserving high-frequency components in LC-MS signals. By locally fitting a high-order
polynomial function to the observed data, Savitzky-Golay filter is particularly successful in
preserving the sharpness of peaks. Other methods such as matched filtering with the second
order derivative of Gaussian function are also shown to be successful in smoothing the
signal and enhance the peaks in a noisy background 38.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Baseline correction algorithms estimate the low-frequency baseline, and then subtract the
estimated baseline from the raw signal. Baseline shift is often observed as the baseline of the
intensities is elevated with increasing retention time, and the elevated baseline results in an
over-estimate of the intensities of those late eluting analytes. A low-order Savitzky-Golay
filter can be used to remove the baseline from LC-MS signal 39. PCA can also be used for
baseline correction by first estimating the noise sub-space and then subtracting the projected
signal in the noise sub-space from the raw data 38. Theoretically, it is expected that filtering
and baseline correction are able to improve the detection and quantitation of peaks.
However, there is no strict performance evaluation and comparison of different techniques
on LC-MS data so far. In addition, as some researchers suggested 40, these algorithms may
be a contributor of noise by themselves. An example of baseline correction is shown in Fig.
3.
Peak detection is a transformation which converts the raw continuous data into centroided
discrete data so each ion is represented as a peak. This transformation offers two advantages:
(1) part of the noise in the continuous data is removed; (2) data dimension is reduced
without much information loss. Peak detection is generally carried out in two steps by first
calculating the centroids of peaks over m/z range and then searching across retention time
range for chromatographic peaks. For peak centroiding over m/z range, many manufactures
of LC-MS instruments have provided vendor-specific software tools which enable the user
to directly acquire centroided data. It is assumed these software tools are superior to general
approaches as they can exploit machine-specific models. Currently, main efforts of peak
detection algorithms focus on centroiding over retention time. Because m/z has significantly
less variation compared with retention time, peak detection is generally performed on
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) 40 which is a 2-D signal of intensity versus retention
time over a small m/z interval. In the majority of algorithms, EICs are acquired through
binning over m/z range with a small bin size (e.g., 10–30 ppm). However, an inevitable
situation in binning is that the trace of one ion may be split into two neighboring bins no
matter how fine the bin size is chosen. Improved EIC extraction is achieved by Kalman
tracking on 3-D LC-MS data or exploiting the density distribution of m/z data points 41, 42.
In both cases, a fixed bin width is avoided. After the extraction of EICs, they are analyzed to
determine the presence of peaks as well as their boundaries. Matched filtering with second
order derivative of Gaussian function 43 is among the most common choices for this step.
An example of peak detected by the method is shown in Fig. 3. More recently, multi-scale
analysis such as “Mexican Hat” wavelet analysis 40 has gained popularity because it is more
effective in handling peak width variation within LC-MS data. Other algorithms try to
improve the peak detection accuracy through better modeling of chromatographic peaks. For
example, a bi-Gaussian mixture model have been used for peak detection 44. However, the
fitting of the model to a particular dataset often needs to be checked as chromatographic
peak characteristics vary among experiments and instruments. To our knowledge, no
performance comparison of peak detection on LC-MS data has been published yet. The
main difficulty for such evaluation is the lack of ground truth, especially for the low
intensity peaks.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Peak matching and retention time alignment enable the comparison of LC-MS-based
metabolomic data across samples. The retention time of an ion may drift across different
samples, even if those samples are analytical replicates. The drift is generally non-uniform
across the retention time range and cannot be completely controlled during experiments. For
large-scale studies involving multiple samples, retention time alignment is used to correct
for the retention time drift and ensure that the same ion is compared across samples. One
way for retention time correction is to add reference compounds to the samples and use
these reference compounds as landmarks to align other peaks 27. However, these landmark
compounds generally need to be carefully selected to have enough coverage of the retention
time range and to avoid overlap with the analyzed metabolites. In addition, the excessive
presence of internal standards may also cause ion suppression of analyzed compounds and
result in unreliable quantitation. Because of these limitations, alignment approaches that do
not rely on reference compounds are desired. One class of these approaches utilizes the peak
detection results and makes efforts to find and match similar peaks 43. For example, XCMS
first uses a kernel estimation procedure to group the peaks with similar m/z values and
retention times across the dataset. After grouping, “well-behaved” peak groups to which
very few samples have no peak assigned or have more than one peaks assigned are used as
landmarks for alignment. The deviations of the retention times of these landmarks from their
median values within peak groups are regressed against the retention time. Those regions on
chromatogram without “well-behaved” peaks can be interpolated and aligned. The aligned
peaks are grouped again to match peaks with corrected retention times. This procedure is
usually carried out iteratively two or three times to make sure the retention time drift is
sufficiently corrected for. The other class of approaches utilizes the LC-MS raw data for
retention time alignment by matching the chromatographic signals, such as EIC or total ion
chromatogram (TIC). Correlation optimized warping (COW) was proposed for aligning
chromatographic signals by dividing the time axis into segments and performing a linear
warping within each segment to maximize the overall correlation of the two
chromatographic profiles 45. Similarly dynamic time warping (DTW) aligns chromatograms
by maximizing the spectra similarity while preserving the internal ordering of the eluents 46.
A critical assessment of several popular alignment methods concludes that XCMS gives the
best performance for alignment of LC-MS metabolomic data 47. However, it is also pointed
out the success of a particular method is highly dependent on the experience of the user to

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 8

choose the appropriate parameters. An example of a set of EIC peaks before and after
alignment is shown in Fig. 3.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Ion Annotation groups together ions which are likely to originate from the same compound.
In LC-MS-based metabolomics, one metabolite is often represented by multiple peaks in
LC-MS data with distinct m/z values but at similar retention times, due to the presence of
isotopes, adducts, and neutral-loss fragments. As long as the scan rate is properly adjusted
and enough scanning points are acquired to define the chromatographic peaks, the ions from
the same compound share similar-shaped elution profiles which can be represented by their
EICs. Thus, ion annotation can be achieved by clustering similar elution profiles together.
An ion annotation approach was previously developed where ions are grouped based on the
Pearson correlation of their EICs 48. If the correlation between two ions is above a predefined threshold, and the m/z difference between the two ions can be explained by known
adducts/isotopes/neutral-loss fragments relationships, the two ions are considered to
originate from the same metabolite. One example of ion annotation is shown in Fig. 3 using
this approach. However, in above method, the choice of the Pearson correlation threshold is
largely empirical without statistical interpretation. Additionally, when the elution profiles of
two ions have a large overlap, Pearson correlation is generally high and not sensitive enough
to capture the subtle differences in EICs. A statistically rigorous approach was proposed to
test if two ions measured by TOF-MS are originated from the same compound 49. In this
approach, the observed TOF-MS signal is modeled as a Poisson process. If two ions are
derived from the same compound, the conditional distribution of observed intensity given
the summed intensity should follow a binomial distribution with a constant success rate
across the retention time. The Pearson chi-square test was used to evaluate the goodness-offit of the observation to binomial distribution, from which an associated p-value is derived.
It was shown that this approach can reduce the ion annotation false positive rate to 6%
compared with the 50% obtained by the Pearson correlation approach while maintaining the
same sensitivity level. However, this approach is limited to data acquired using TOF
analyzer and time-to-digital converter (TDC) detectors. In addition, when the ion intensity is
high, the acquired signal will deviate from the Poisson process due to detector saturation,
thus an inflated p-value is obtained.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Normalization of peak intensities helps to reduce the systematic variation of LC-MS data.
One way to normalize LC-MS data is to add same amount of internal standards into all the
samples. Relative abundance is calculated by adjusting other ions’ intensities based on their
ratios to internal standards. When there are multiple internal standards, an algorithm was
developed to find optimized normalization factor for each peak utilizing variability
information from internal standards 50. Four normalization techniques without using internal
standards were reviewed in a metabolomic study of urine samples 51. The study
recommended the use of two normalization techniques for endogenous metabolites:
normalization to osmolality and normalization to “total useful MS signal”.
Transformation of LC-MS data is sometimes needed to modify the data distribution so it is
more suitable for subsequent statistical analysis. For example, transformations which lead to
a more normal-distributed dataset or compress the dynamic range of data are often used.
These transformations are usually heuristic. Z-score, log-transformation, and square-root
transformation of peak intensities are common choices of transformations.
Software tools are provided by most instrument manufactures to relieve the LC-MS system
users from the burden of sophisticated and sometimes heuristic pre-processing steps,
especially peak detection and alignment. For example, MarkerLynx (Waters) is provided in
conjunction with Waters LC-MS system for data pre-processing, visualization and statistical
analysis. Other commercially available tools such as AnalyzerPro (SpectralWorks) and

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Genedata Refiner MS (Genedata) also provide pre-processing capability for LC-MS data.
Publicly available software tools for pre-processing and analysis of LC-MS data include
MZmine 52, XCMS 43, and MetAlign 53. These tools accept LC-MS data files of one or
more standard file exchange format, such as NetCDF, mzXML, and mzML. Various steps in
LC-MS data preprocessing are integrated into one platform and often modularized. The preprocessed results can be exported for further statistical analysis. Although the
implementation details for the commercially available software are not often available,
many of the algorithms reviewed before were implemented in the publicly available
software. However, all of these software tools involve a large number of parameters which
need to be chosen by the user. Because these parameters are often experiment-specific, they
need to be understood and fine-tuned to ensure the success of preprocessing. A parameter
selection procedure was proposed based on discrepancies among replicate samples. The
advantage of the procedure was showcased in combination with XCMS by doubling the
number of detected peaks with improved intensity estimations 54.

8. Statistical analysis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

After pre-processing, the LC-MS raw data are summarized by a peak list. The statistical
analysis aims to detect those peaks whose intensity levels are significantly altered between
distinct biological groups. The specific choice of statistical methods often depends on the
particular study design, while some methods can be applied to multiple types of studies.
The statistical analysis methods can be categorized as univariate and multivariate analysis.
The univariate approach assesses the statistical significance of each peak separately.
Commonly used univariate techniques include t-test, fold-change analysis, Wilcoxon ranksum test, analysis of variance (ANOVA), etc. They are used to find the significantly altered
metabolites in both unpaired 55 or paired studies 56. P-values are usually assessed in
univariate methods, either through parametric approaches or permutation tests. Because
thousands of metabolites can be simultaneously measured in an untargeted study, the
multiple hypothesis testing problem will result in a high chance of false discovery even with
a small p-value threshold. False discovery rate (FDR) is used to estimate the chance of false
discovery at a given test statistics threshold or to control the total number of false
discoveries. A q-value for each peak can be evaluated which is the minimum FDR at which
that peak is called significant. Multiple methods exist to estimate or control the FDR 57.
Some algorithms, such as significance analysis of microarray (SAM), directly estimate qvalues using a re-sampling approach.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Multivariate analysis considers the combinatorial effect of multiple variables. It can be
further categorized as unsupervised and supervised techniques. Unsupervised learning refers
to methods that identify hidden structure in the data without knowing the class labels. One
of the most popular unsupervised techniques in LC-MS-based metabolomic study is PCA,
which finds a series of orthogonal projection directions that maximize the variance of the
projected data. If PCA successfully clusters the samples according to prior knowledge
(phenotype, genotype, time course, dose response etc), the metabolites with the largest
weights in the loading vectors of the first few principal components are considered as most
relevant to the interested biological question. PCA has been extensively used in multiple
studies to elucidate the metabolomic consequence in time-course studies 58, to phenotype
closely related genotypes 59, and to find indicative metabolites for diseases 60. Other
unsupervised techniques such as self-organizing map (SOM) 61 or two-mode clustering 62
have also been used in LC-MS-based metabolomic studies.
In contrary to unsupervised techniques, supervised learning uses the class label information
to construct a model to interpret the LC-MS data. Partial least square-discriminant analysis

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(PLS-DA) is a supervised technique widely used in LC-MS-based metabolomic data
analysis. PLS-DA finds the projection direction which gives the largest covariance between
the data and the labels. It is successful in identifying the projection that separates the predefined groups and finding the discriminant metabolites for the separation 58. PLS-DA has
also seen applications in other study designs, such as the case-control study 63 or the timecourse study 64. In addition to PLS-DA, other supervised learning methods such as random
forest 65 and support vector machine 66 have also been used in assessing the discriminative
power of metabolites. However, results from supervised techniques could be misleading due
to over-fitting to the limited observation data. As a result, cross-validations or permutation
tests 67 are needed to ensure the generalization capability of the constructed models.
An integrated software tool named MetaboAnalyst has been developed for statistical
analysis of LC-MS data, which incorporated various algorithms 68. Many of the algorithms
were previously developed for microarray data analysis, such as SAM and empirical
Bayesian analysis of microarray. Other software tools such as Gene Expression Dynamics
Inspector can also be used for metabolomic data analysis 69.

9. Metabolite identification

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

One of the major challenges in metabolomic studies is the identification of metabolites.
Metabolites include a wide variety of structure classes such as sugars, lipids, steroids, amino
acids, etc. Their chemical and physical diversities make it difficult to derive general rules to
predict the fragmentation patterns. Many types of metabolism reactions further complicate
the identification task. While it is estimated that there are 2,000 major metabolites in human
body 70, the total number of possible metabolites in nature can reach up to 1,000,000 71.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

At present, metabolite identification in untargeted metabolic analysis is mainly achieved
through mass-based search followed by manual verification. First, the m/z value of a
molecular ion of interest is searched against database(s) 72–75. The molecules having
molecular weights within a specified tolerance range to the query molecular weight are
retrieved from databases as putative identifications. The mass-based search can seldom
provide unique identifications for the ions of interest due to three reasons. First, it has been
shown that even with an accuracy of less than 1 ppm, which is a remarkably better accuracy
than most analytical platforms can achieve, it is still not sufficient for unambiguous
metabolite identification due to the presence of compounds with extremely similar
molecular weights 8. Second, mass-based metabolite identification cannot discriminate
isomers which have the same elemental composition but different structures. Third, all the
metabolite databases are of limited coverage. Generally less than 30% of the detected ions in
a typical LC-MS-based metabolomic experiment can be uniquely identified through massbased search, leaving most of the ions either unidentified or with multiple putative
identifications. Improved approaches, such as those involving isotope labeling, can be used
to reduce the ambiguities from the mass-based search. But they cannot guarantee unique
identification either 76.
While retention index derived from retention time in GC-MS experiments has been included
in libraries and used for metabolite identification, no such index currently exists for LC-MS
experiments. Due to the run-to-run variation of retention time even on the same machine, the
comparison of retention times can only be performed under identical experimental
conditions.
To verify the mass-based search results, authentic compounds of those putative
identifications are subjected to MS or tandem MS experiments together with the sample. By
comparing the retention times or tandem MS spectra of the authentic compounds with the
ions of interest in the sample, the identities of the metabolites can be confirmed. It may be
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 11

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

necessary to extend the MS2 to MS3 or MS4 level for more confident identifications of some
metabolites. It was suggested that at least two independent and orthogonal data (retention
time and mass spectrum, accurate mass and tandem mass spectrum, etc.) relative to an
authentic compound analyzed under identical experimental conditions are necessary to
verify a putative metabolite identification 9. The limiting factor of verification is that it is
often costly and time consuming. The authentic compounds of putative identifications need
to be acquired. More experiments need to be performed. Sometimes, a molecular ion can
have more than 100 putative identifications which make manual verifications extremely
laborious. An example of verification for S-1-P (Sphingosine-1-phosphate) through MS2
spectra is shown in Fig. 4.

10. Metabolite quantitation
LC-MS methods described in the previous section are primarily for semi-quantative
characterization of metabolites. Quantitation of metabolites can help evaluate metabolic
changes and further check the results from semi-quantative analysis. In the following, we
discuss quantitation methods using selected reaction monitoring (SRM) (e.g., QqQ-based
LC-SRM-MS/MS) and LC-HRMS in full scan. Note that multiple reaction monitoring
(MRM) is used as a synonym for SRM.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In the QqQ-based SRM experiment, the precursor ion selected in the first quadruple (MS1)
is dissociated to fragment ions in the collision cell and only specific fragment ion (daughter
ion) is selected in the second quadruple (MS2) for detection. The two-stage ion selection
procedure produces a sensitive measurement that is specific to both molecular weight
(precursor ion) and structure (fragment ion) of a given analyte. Such pair of m/z values is
referred to as “transition” in SRM.
SRM, as the gold standard of absolute quantitation can measure real concentration of several
metabolites in a single run by using the isotope dilution technique, where a stable isotope
analogue of the analyte compound is used as an internal standard (IS) in the MS analysis.
Because of the high physical–chemical similarities between the labeled IS and the analyte,
degradation during sample preparation, variations in instrumental response, and ion
suppression effects in LC–ESI-MS can be compensated. The ratio of their MS signals within
the dynamic range remains the same as well. Absolute quantitation of metabolites can be
achieved by correlating their ratio of MS signals detected by SRM in the calibration curves
as illustrated in Fig. 5, where calibration curves are constructed by relating the varying
amounts of each analyte to their relative response factors (RRFs) as determined by the ratio
of the peak area of the analyte to that of the corresponding isotope-labeled IS.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

SRM has become the method of choice for small molecule quantitation for more than three
decades 77. With the development of more effective sample preparation and
chromatographic separations, e.g. adopting more selective SPE cleanup step and introducing
dual chromatographic methodology by combining ion-paring RPLC and HILIC, modern
QqQ mass spectrometers with fast spectral scan rate (e.g. SRM dwell time < 25ms) and high
ionization efficiency (e.g. heated ESI or nano ESI) can achieve simultaneous quantitation of
hundreds of metabolites. QqQ-based LC-SRM-MS/MS has become an ideal quantitative
approach for targeted metabolic analysis 15, 78.
Although QqQ-based SRM quantitation has high sensitivity, the specificity of the method
limits its application to targeted metabolomics and often neglects the information of other
metabolites. In addition, some analytes only have non-specific transitions that are also
common for matrix interferences such as the neutral loss of H2O or CO2. This compromises
the specificity of SRM method and causes inaccurate quantitation. A global MS detection by
HRMS, such as FTICR, Orbitrap, TOF or QTOF can address these limitations in SRM
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

analysis. HRMS operating in full-scan mode can determine virtually all compounds present
in a sample. Modern HRMS instruments with fast scan rates allow the acquisition of enough
data points across a chromatographic peak for accurate quantitation using EICs by centering
a narrow mass window (e.g. ±5–10 mmu) on the theoretical m/z value for each analyte. This
quantitation approach avoids the pre-selection of SRM transitions and offers the quantitation
of off-target compounds. So far FTICR presents the unsurpassed high mass accuracy and
resolving power, but it is not widely used because of its high cost, maintenance difficulty,
and compatibility with LC compared with Orbitrap and TOF mass spectrometers. More
recently, Orbitrap-based HRMS has become the platform of choice to perform integrated
qualitative and quantitative analysis in the full-scan mode 79. Especially the new benchtop
Exactive Orbitrap™ showed more competitive advantages in terms of cost, sensitivity, mass
accuracy, and linear dynamic range 80. Meanwhile, efforts have been made in sample
preparation and LC separation in order to increase detection sensitivity, metabolites
coverage and quantitation accuracy by HRMS full scan-based LC-MS method. For example
the absolute or relative quantitation of a large number of unknown metabolites in complex
samples has been advanced by differential isotope labeling techniques 81. Although there are
only a few papers reporting TOF/QTOF-based HRMS for quantitative analysis, modern
TOF technology could offer a potential alternative. The limited dynamic range in typical
TOF instruments using TDC has been improved by analog-to-digital detector technology
(ADC) 82. Significant improvements have been made in mass resolution and mass accuracy
of TOF instruments. Currently TOF instruments with 40,000 in resolution and sub-ppm
accuracy are possible 83, such as Agilent 6540 Ultra High Definition Accurate-Mass QTOF
not only allow accurate-mass measurements for compound confirmation and molecular
formula generation, but also provide accurate isotope ratios. Such capabilities help us
narrow down the list of plausible molecular formulas and increase confidence in the result.

11. Pathway Analysis

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Metabolomics is one member in the “omics” cascade. To acquire a comprehensive picture of
the biological process, it needs to be combined with other data from genomics,
transcriptomics, and proteomics. Data from different platforms will support and complement
each other to understand the biological mechanism. Integration of the data from
heterogeneous sources on the biological network or pathway level has proved to provide a
more complete picture about the investigated biological system. Metabolite set enrichment
analysis (MSEA) has been developed to provide functional interpretation of a selected set of
metabolites, after verification and quantitation of metabolites from untargeted studies 84.
MSEA assembles predefined metabolite sets through both public databases (such as HMDB
and KEGG) and text mining of literatures. Using these metabolite sets as the backend
knowledgebase, MSEA enables researchers to perform enrichment analysis on a list of
altered metabolites from a biofluid or tissue to identify a biological pathway or disease
condition that can be further investigated. A Google-Map style interactive visualization
system is used to help users understand the pathway analysis results. A similar algorithm,
metabolite pathway enrichment analysis (MPEA), has also been published which can
accommodate ambiguous identifications for metabolites 85. Pathway enrichment analysis is
also available through commercial pathway analysis tools including Ingenuity Pathways
Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity Systems), Pathway Studio (Ariadne Genomics), and MetaCore
(GeneGo). Pathway enrichment analysis tests if a group of metabolites are involved in a
particular pathway compared with random hits. For example, IPA-Metabolomics is a
capability within IPA that can extract rich pathway information from metabolomic data.
Through pathway analysis, the results from metabolomics study can be compared,
confirmed and integrated with other “omics” studies such as transcriptomics 85 and
proteomics.

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 13

12. Future outlook
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

While many studies have already benefited from metabolomics, certain issues still need to
be addressed to fully utilize the potential of LC-MS in metabolomic studies. Some of these
issues and future outlooks are discussed below.
The hyphenation of UPLC to MS can be advantageous for better assignment of metabolites
from chromatographic mass signals 86. In the future, as new quadrupole mass analyzers
evolve with faster acquisition rate or shorter dwell time, their coupling with advanced HPLC
will allow the analysis of hundreds of metabolites or more at once. Therefore SRM will find
more applications in monitoring concentration changes of endogenous metabolites in
targeted analysis 78. At the same time, for less targeted analyses involving a large number of
analytes, full-scan HRMS with high mass resolution and high mass accuracy hold the
promise for quantitative metabolomics in the future.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The identification of metabolites is the current bottle-neck in LC-MS-based metabolomic
studies. Although it is generally easy to measure the exact mass of a molecular ion detected
in LC-MS experiments, mass information alone is often not enough to fully characterize its
structure and identify it as a specific biochemical entity. Although novel metabolites
continue to be discovered, many of the metabolites we face in practice have already been
found and identified in some other studies. The collection and utilization of these “known
unknowns” pose major challenges for computational and informatics tools. This is in part
because the information is often scattered in different sources, in various formats, and with
spectra acquired under different conditions. In addition to data collection, multiple steps are
required to fully utilize the information embedded in LC-MS and MS/MS data. Automated
acquisition of high-quality MS/MS spectra is needed to increase the throughput of
metabolite identification. Improved in-silico fragmentation models of metabolites are
needed, which consider complicated ion-molecular interactions encountered in metabolites
fragmentation. LC-MS/MS spectral libraries for metabolites, such as HMDB 72, Metlin 74,
and MassBank 87, continue to evolve and expand for increased metabolome coverage. In
addition, carefully designed experiments and appropriate spectral matching algorithms are
desired to ensure spectral libraries from different laboratories and instruments are
transferable 34. Last but not least, integration of contextual information into identification
can potentially reduce the ambiguity in metabolite identification 88.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Cancer Institute Grant R21CA153176.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

References
1. Fiehn O. Plant Mol Biol. 2002; 48:155–171. [PubMed: 11860207]
2. Nicholson JK, Lindon JC, Holmes E. Xenobiotica. 1999; 29:1181–1189. [PubMed: 10598751]
3. Robertson DG. Toxicol Sci. 2005; 85:809–822. [PubMed: 15689416]
4. Khoo SH, Al-Rubeai M. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2007; 47:71–84. [PubMed: 17492944]
5. Goodacre R, Vaidyanathan S, Dunn WB, Harrigan GG, Kell DB. Trends Biotechnol. 2004; 22:245–
252. [PubMed: 15109811]
6. van der Werf MJ, Takors R, Smedsgaard J, Nielsen J, Ferenci T, Portais JC, Wittmann C, Hooks M,
Tomassini A, Oldiges M, et al. Metabolomics. 2007; 3:189–194.
7. Griffin JL, Nicholls AW, Daykin CA, Heald S, Keun HC, Schuppe-Koistinen I, Griffiths JR, Cheng
LL, Rocca-Serra P, Rubtsov DV, et al. Metabolomics. 2007; 3:179–188.
8. Kind T, Fiehn O. BMC Bioinformatics. 2006; 7:234. [PubMed: 16646969]

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

9. Sumner L, Amberg A, Barrett D, Beale M, Beger R, Daykin C, Fan T, Fiehn O, Goodacre R, Griffin
J, Hankemeier T, Hardy N, Harnly J, Higashi R, Kopka J, Lane A, Lindon J, Marriott P, Nicholls A,
Reily M, Thaden J, Viant M. Metabolomics. 2007; 3:211–221.
10. De Vos RCH, Moco S, Lommen A, Keurentjes JJB, Bino RJ, Hall RD. Nat Protoc. 2007; 2:778–
791. [PubMed: 17446877]
11. Zivkovic A, Wiest M, Nguyen U, Davis R, Watkins S, German J. Metabolomics. 2009; 5:507–516.
[PubMed: 20046864]
12. Tanja M. Plant Methods. 2010; 6:6. [PubMed: 20181048]
13. Wuolikainen A, Hedenström M, Moritz T, Marklund SL, Antti H, Andersen PM. Amyotroph
Lateral Scler. 2009; 10:229–236. [PubMed: 19412814]
14. Rai AJ, Gelfand CA, Haywood BC, Warunek DJ, Yi J, Schuchard MD, Mehigh RJ, Cockrill SL,
Scott GBI, Tammen H, Schulz-Knappe P, Speicher DW, Vitzthum F, Haab BB, Siest G, Chan
DW. Proteomics. 2005; 5:3262–3277. [PubMed: 16052621]
15. Lu W, Bennett BD, Rabinowitz JD. J Chromatogr B. 2008; 871:236–242.
16. Canelas AB, Ras C, ten Pierick A, van Dam JC, Heijnen JJ, van Gulik WM. Metabolomics. 2008;
4:226–239.
17. Taymaz-Nikerel H, De Mey M, Ras C, Ten Pierick A, Seifar RM, Van Dam JC, Heijnen JJ, Van
Gulik WM. Anal Biochem. 2009; 386:9–19. [PubMed: 19084496]
18. Rabinowitz JD, Kimball E. Anal Chem. 2007; 79:6167–6173. [PubMed: 17630720]
19. Canelas AB, ten Pierick A, Ras C, Seifar RM, van Dam JC, van Gulik WM, Heijnen JJ. Anal
Chem. 2009; 81:7379–7389. [PubMed: 19653633]
20. Mitra, S. Sample preperation techniques in analytical chemistry. Wiley; 2003.
21. Peterson ZD, Lee ML, Graves SW. Journal of Chromatography B. 2004; 810:101–110.
22. Hernández-Borges J, Borges-Miquel TM, Rodríguez-Delgado MÁ, Cifuentes A. J Chromatogr A.
2007; 1153:214–226. [PubMed: 17098242]
23. Idborg-Björkman H, Edlund PO, Kvalheim OM, Schuppe-Koistinen I, Jacobsson SP. Analytical
Chemistry. 2003; 75:4784–4792. [PubMed: 14674455]
24. Masson P, Alves AC, Ebbels TMD, Nicholson JK, Want EJ. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:7779–7786.
[PubMed: 20715759]
25. Theodoridis G, Gika H, Franceschi P, Caputi L, Arapitsas P, Scholz M, Masuero D, Wehrens R,
Vrhovsek U, Mattivi F. Metabolomics. 2011:1–11. In Press. [PubMed: 21461033]
26. Álvarez-Sánchez B, Priego-Capote F, Castro MDLd. TrAC, Trends Anal Chem. 2010; 29:120–
127.
27. Dettmer K, Aronov PA, Hammock BD. Mass Spectrom Rev. 2007; 26:51–78. [PubMed:
16921475]
28. Krauss M, Singer H, Hollender J. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2010; 397:943–951. [PubMed: 20232059]
29. Yates JR, Ruse CI, Nakorchevsky A. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering. 2009; 11:49–79.
30. Gelpí E. J Mass Spectrom. 2009; 44:1137–1161. [PubMed: 19637251]
31. Schellinger AP, Carr PW. J Chromatogr A. 2006; 1109:253–266. [PubMed: 16460742]
32. Bowen BP, Northen TR. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2010; 21:1471–1476. [PubMed: 20452782]
33. Guillarme D, Nguyen DTT, Rudaz S, Veuthey JL. J Chromatogr A. 2007; 1149:20–29. [PubMed:
17129584]
34. Hopley C, Bristow T, Lubben A, Simpson A, Bull E, Klagkou K, Herniman J, Langley J. Rapid
Commun Mass Spectrom. 2008; 22:1779–1786. [PubMed: 18470872]
35. Milman BL. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2005; 19:2833–2839. [PubMed: 16155973]
36. Cho H, Kim Y-j, Jung HJ, Lee S-W, Lee JW. Bioinformatics. 2008; 24:882–884. [PubMed:
18187441]
37. Schulz-Trieglaff O, Machtejevas E, Reinert K, Schluter H, Thiemann J, Unger K. BioData Min.
2009; 2:4. [PubMed: 19351414]
38. Bylund, D. Doctoral thesis. Mid Sweden University; 2001.
39. Wang W, Zhou H, Lin H, Roy S, Shaler TA, Hill LR, Norton S, Kumar P, Anderle M, Becker CH.
Anal Chem. 2003; 75:4818–4826. [PubMed: 14674459]

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

40. Tautenhahn R, Bottcher C, Neumann S. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008; 9:504. [PubMed: 19040729]
41. Aberg KM, Torgrip RJO, Kolmert J, Schuppe-Koistinen I, Lindberg J. J Chromatogr A. 2008;
1192:139–146. [PubMed: 18378252]
42. Stolt R, Torgrip RJO, Lindberg J, Csenki L, Kolmert J, Schuppe-Koistinen I, Jacobsson SP. Anal
Chem. 2006; 78:975–983. [PubMed: 16478086]
43. Smith CA, Want EJ, O’Maille G, Abagyan R, Siuzdak G. Anal Chem. 2006; 78:779–787.
[PubMed: 16448051]
44. Yu T, Peng H. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010; 11:559. [PubMed: 21073736]
45. Nielsen NPV, Carstensen JM, Smedsgaard J. J Chromatogr A. 1998; 805:17–35.
46. Wang CP, Isenhour TL. Anal Chem. 1987; 59:649–654.
47. Lange E, Tautenhahn R, Neumann S, Gropl C. BMC Bioinformatics. 2008; 9:375. [PubMed:
18793413]
48. Tautenhahn, R.; Böttcher, C.; Neumann, S. Bioinformatics Research and Development. Hochreiter,
S.; Wagner, R., editors. Vol. 4414. Springer; Berlin / Heidelberg: 2007. p. 371-380.
49. Ipsen A, Want EJ, Lindon JC, Ebbels TMD. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:1766–1778. [PubMed:
20143830]
50. Sysi-Aho M, Katajamaa M, Yetukuri L, Oresic M. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007; 8:93. [PubMed:
17362505]
51. Warrack BM, Hnatyshyn S, Ott KH, Reily MD, Sanders M, Zhang H, Drexler DM. J Chromatogr
B. 2009; 877:547–552.
52. Katajamaa M, Oresic M. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005; 6:179. [PubMed: 16026613]
53. Lommen A. Anal Chem. 2009; 81:3079–3086. [PubMed: 19301908]
54. Brodsky L, Moussaieff A, Shahaf N, Aharoni A, Rogachev I. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:9177–9187.
[PubMed: 20977194]
55. Wikoff WR, Gangoiti JA, Barshop BA, Siuzdak G. Clin Chem. 2007; 53:2169–2176. [PubMed:
17951291]
56. Sreekumar A, Poisson LM, Rajendiran TM, Khan AP, Cao Q, Yu J, Laxman B, Mehra R, Lonigro
RJ, Li Y, Nyati MK, Ahsan A, Kalyana-Sundaram S, Han B, Cao X, Byun J, Omenn GS, Ghosh
D, Pennathur S, Alexander DC, Berger A, Shuster JR, Wei JT, Varambally S, Beecher C,
Chinnaiyan AM. Nature. 2009; 457:910–914. [PubMed: 19212411]
57. Storey, J. International Encyclopedia of Statistical Science. 1. Lovric, M., editor. Springer; 2011. p.
1673
58. Chen C, Krausz KW, Shah YM, Idle JR, Gonzalez FJ. Chem Res Toxicol. 2009; 22:699–707.
[PubMed: 19256530]
59. Arbona V, Iglesias DJ, Talón M, Gómez-Cadenas A. J Agric Food Chem. 2009; 57:7338–7347.
[PubMed: 19639992]
60. Kim K, Aronov P, Zakharkin SO, Anderson D, Perroud B, Thompson IM, Weiss RH. Mol Cell
Proteomics. 2009; 8:558–570. [PubMed: 19008263]
61. Kim JK, Bamba T, Harada K, Fukusaki E, Kobayashi A. J Exp Bot. 2007; 58:415–424. [PubMed:
17118972]
62. Hageman J, Malosetti M, van Eeuwijk F. Euphytica. 2010:1–11.
63. Yin P, Zhao X, Li Q, Wang J, Li J, Xu G. J Proteome Res. 2006; 5:2135–2143. [PubMed:
16944924]
64. Wopereis S, Rubingh CM, van Erk MJ, Verheij ER, van Vliet T, Cnubben NHP, Smilde AK, van
der Greef J, van Ommen B, Hendriks HFJ. PLoS ONE. 2009; 4:e4525. [PubMed: 19242536]
65. Enot D, Beckmann M, Draper J. Computational Life Sciences II. 2006:226–235.
66. Guan W, Zhou M, Hampton C, Benigno B, Walker LD, Gray A, McDonald J, Fernandez F. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2009; 10:259. [PubMed: 19698113]
67. Bijlsma S, Bobeldijk I, Verheij ER, Ramaker R, Kochhar S, Macdonald IA, van Ommen B, Smilde
AK. Anal Chem. 2005; 78:567–574. [PubMed: 16408941]
68. Xia J, Psychogios N, Young N, Wishart DS. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:W652–660. [PubMed:
19429898]

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

69. Patterson AD, Li H, Eichler GS, Krausz KW, Weinstein JN, Fornace AJ, Gonzalez FJ, Idle JR.
Anal Chem. 2008; 80:665–674. [PubMed: 18173289]
70. Beecher, CWW. Metabolic Profiling: Its Role in Biomarker Discovery and Gene Function
Analysis. 1. George, RG.; Harrigan, G., editors. Springer; 2003. p. 352
71. Wink M. TAG Theoretical and Applied Genetics. 1988; 75:225–233.
72. Wishart DS, Tzur D, Knox C, Eisner R, Guo AC, Young N, Cheng D, Jewell K, Arndt D, Sawhney
S, Fung C, Nikolai L, Lewis M, Coutouly MA, Forsythe I, Tang P, Shrivastava S, Jeroncic K,
Stothard P, Amegbey G, Block D, Hau DD, Wagner J, Miniaci J, Clements M, Gebremedhin M,
Guo N, Zhang Y, Duggan GE, Macinnis GD, Weljie AM, Dowlatabadi R, Bamforth F, Clive D,
Greiner R, Li L, Marrie T, Sykes BD, Vogel HJ, Querengesser L. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;
35:D521–526. [PubMed: 17202168]
73. Cui Q, Lewis IA, Hegeman AD, Anderson ME, Li J, Schulte CF, Westler WM, Eghbalnia HR,
Sussman MR, Markley JL. Nat Biotechnol. 2008; 26:162–164. [PubMed: 18259166]
74. Smith CA, Maille GO, Want EJ, Qin C, Trauger SA, Brandon TR, Custodio DE, Abagyan R,
Siuzdak G. Ther Drug Monit. 2005; 27:747–751. [PubMed: 16404815]
75. Go E. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2010; 5:18–30. [PubMed: 19418229]
76. Giavalisco P, Köhl K, Hummel J, Seiwert B, Willmitzer L. Anal Chem. 2009; 81:6546–6551.
[PubMed: 19588932]
77. Baty JD, Robinson PR. Biomed Mass Spectrom. 1977; 4:36–41. [PubMed: 836941]
78. Griffiths WJ, Koal T, Wang Y, Kohl M, Enot DP, Deigner HP. Angew Chem Int Ed. 2010;
49:5426–5445.
79. Scheltema RA, Kamleh A, Wildridge D, Ebikeme C, Watson DG, Barrett MP, Jansen RC,
Breitling R. Proteomics. 2008; 8:4647–4656. [PubMed: 18937253]
80. Wong RL, Xin B, Olah T. Bioanalysis. 2011; 3:863–871. [PubMed: 21510760]
81. Guo K, Li L. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:8789–8793.
82. Stroh JG, Petucci CJ, Brecker SJ, Huang N, Lau JM. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2007; 18:1612–
1616. [PubMed: 17629494]
83. Ow SY, Noirel J, Salim M, Evans C, Watson R, Wright PC. PROTEOMICS. 2010; 10:2205–2213.
[PubMed: 20352625]
84. Xia J, Wishart DS. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010; 38:W71–W77. [PubMed: 20457745]
85. Kankainen M, Gopalacharyulu P, Holm L, Orešič M. Bioinformatics. 2011
86. Guillarme D, Schappler J, Rudaz S, Veuthey JL. TrAC, Trends Anal Chem. 2010; 29:15–27.
87. Horai H, Arita M, Kanaya S, Nihei Y, Ikeda T, Suwa K, Ojima Y, Tanaka K, Tanaka S, Aoshima
K, Oda Y, Kakazu Y, Kusano M, Tohge T, Matsuda F, Sawada Y, Hirai MY, Nakanishi H, Ikeda
K, Akimoto N, Maoka T, Takahashi H, Ara T, Sakurai N, Suzuki H, Shibata D, Neumann S, Iida
T, Tanaka K, Funatsu K, Matsuura F, Soga T, Taguchi R, Saito K, Nishioka T. J Mass Spectrom.
2010; 45:703–714. [PubMed: 20623627]
88. Rogers S, Scheltema RA, Girolami M, Breitling R. Bioinformatics. 2009; 25:512–518. [PubMed:
19095699]

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 1.

A typical workflow of a metabolomic study.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 2.

Ranges of applicability of APPI, APCI and ESI.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 3.

Preprocessing of a LC-MS dataset with 10 samples. The LC-MS raw data are first corrected
for baseline effect, and then peak detection is performed on each EIC to detect the peak(s).
For multiple samples peak alignment is used to correct for retention time drift. The peak list
can be acquired after peak alignment for the dataset. Ion annotation is used to recognize the
peaks originating from the same metabolite. The data are acquired using a UPLC-QTOF
Premier instrument.

Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig.4.

Metabolite ID verification by comparison of the MS2 spectrum of S-1-P (top) with
experimental sample (bottom). The MS2 spectra are acquired with a precursor ion mass at
378 Da under negative ionization mode on a QSTAR Elite instrument.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 5.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Illustration of absolute quantitation of metabolites by QqQ-based SRM using isotope
dilution technique.(a) SRM detection of analyte and its isotope-labelled IS; (b) absolute
quantitation of four analytes by SRM: correlating signal ratio of analyte and IS to its
respective standard curve.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

Zhou et al.

Page 22

Table 1

Performance of modern mass spectrometers in small molecule quantitation

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MS

Resolving power a

Mass accuracy

Scan rate

Detection limit b

QqQ

Unit resolution

50 ppm

Moderate

fg-pg* (SRM)

QIT

10,000

50 ppm

Moderate

fg-pg (SRM)

LIT

10,000

50 ppm

Fast

pg (SRM)

IT-TOF/ QTOF

20,000

3 ppm

Fast/moderate

pg (full scan)

High-Res-TOF

60,000

2ppm

Fast

pg (full scan)

Q- Orbitrap/LTQ-Orbitrap

140,000

2 ppm

Moderate

fg-pg (full scan); SRM compatible

LTQ-FTICR/Q-FTICR

1,000,000

≤1 ppm

Slow/slow

pg (full scan)

a

Resolving power depends on m/z range and scan speed of the instruments. Values here are obtained on m/z 400 (ref. 28). Modern mass
spectrometers obtain better resolution and mass accuracy.

b

Sensitivity depends strongly on the ionization efficiency of the compound in the ion source.

*

fg and pg refer to femtogram and pictogram, and SRM refers to selected reaction monitoring

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Mol Biosyst. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 July 02.

