NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Published in final edited form as:
Methods Mol Biol. 2010 ; 656: 21–49. doi:10.1007/978-1-60761-746-4_2.

A mass spectrometry primer for mass spectrometry imaging
Stanislav S. Rubakhin and Jonathan V. Sweedler
Department of Chemistry and the Beckman Institute, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801

Abstract

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI), a rapidly growing subfield of chemical imaging, employs mass
spectrometry (MS) technologies to create single- and multi-dimensional localization maps for a
variety of atoms and molecules. Complimentary to other imaging approaches, MSI provides high
chemical specificity and broad analyte coverage. This powerful analytical toolset is capable of
measuring the distribution of many classes of inorganics, metabolites, proteins and
pharmaceuticals in chemically and structurally complex biological specimens in vivo, in vitro, and
in situ. The MSI approaches highlighted in this Methods in Molecular Biology volume provide
flexibility of detection, characterization, and identification of multiple known and unknown
analytes. The goal of this chapter is to introduce investigators who may be unfamiliar with MS to
the basic principles of the mass spectrometric approaches as used in MSI. In addition to guidelines
for choosing the most suitable MSI method for specific investigations, cross-references are
provided to the chapters in this volume that describe the appropriate experimental protocols.

1. Introduction

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Understanding the functioning of a cell, organ, or organism, whether normal or pathological,
often relies on the ability to follow the spatial localization of molecules and atoms with
sufficient spatial and temporal resolution. Success can be facilitated by mass spectrometry
imaging (MSI), a robust analytical approach that combines the chemical information content
of MS detection with chemical imaging technology. MSI allows the simultaneous
localization of hundreds of analytes in a variety of biological samples, from defined
morphological structures to entire organisms, without analyte preselection using antibody
labeling. The metabolome, peptidome, and proteome can be investigated with MSI,
providing spatial and chemical information for literally hundreds to thousands of analytes,
ranging from small molecules to large proteins. Although implementation requires
specialized hardware, software, and experimental protocols, including sample preparation
methods, a range of features, along with recent advances in instrumentation, have
contributed to an increased interest in using MSI for chemical imaging.
In MSI, a specimen is typically interrogated by a beam of light or ions called a microprobe.
As a result, multiple analytes are moved from solid or liquid to gas phase, ionized, and
characterized according to their mass-to-charge ratio. The microprobe is then moved to
another location and the process repeated. If the microprobe is scanned across the surface at
a sufficient number of regularly spaced points, chemical images for each analyte are created
(Fig. 1). A chemical image presents not only information about analyte localization, but also
provides signal intensity information, often encoded by color or grayscale. Depending on the
analytical method used and sample properties, signal intensity often correlates with the
absolute or relative concentration of each analyte. Although MSI approaches can differ in
the software and sample preparation protocols used, they share many features of common
MS measurements and thus, are often employed in MS or proteomics facilities. However,
MSI can easily be implemented in many biological and neuroscientific laboratories.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 2

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In addition to the discussion of the basics of mass spectrometric technologies presented
herein, the reader will be directed, as appropriate, to cross-referenced chapters in this
volume that provide more specifics on the MSI approaches. Even greater detail on both MS
and MSI can be found in several excellent books and reviews (1-10).

2. Mass Spectrometry (MS)
Mass, considered a fundamental property of matter (11), is defined as a measure of a body's
inertia, or resistance to a change in body motion upon application of an external force.
Having knowledge of a particle's exact mass and some details about its structure, is
sufficient to identify an element or polyatomic substance. MS is one of most precise, fast,
and reliable methods available to determine the molecular and atomic masses of analytes
with high accuracy in a single measurement.
2.1 Principles of Mass Spectrometry

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A key element of MS is based on the ability of magnetic and/or electric fields to influence
the motion of charged atoms and molecules, typically in a vacuum, in relation to their mass
and charge. Newton's second law is a fundamental basis for MS, where the resistance of a
particle to a change in its motion (inertia) exerted by a force, and the proportionality of this
change to the intensity of the applied force, are used to determine a particle's mass. Indeed,
the trajectories of two identically moving particles of the same charge will change
differently under the influence of identical electric and/or magnetic field(s) if the particles
have different masses. The motion of the heavier particle will be affected less than the
lighter one. As a result, the final relative spatial positions of the moving particles will
depend on their inertial mass (m) and, for differently charged particles, on their charge (z). A
particle's charge is an important factor as the amount of force developed by a field relates
directly to the charge. The motion of the higher-charged particle will be affected more by
the fields than the lesser-charged particle's motion, when all parameters, except charge, are
the same. Therefore, by controlling the forces, predicting particle trajectories, and
selectively detecting particles, one can deconvolve the motions into each distinct particle's
mass-to-charge ratio, or m/z. Results of mass spectrometric investigation are typically
presented in the form of mass spectra, where m/z values are plotted along the x-axis and the
relative intensity of the charged particle signals against the y-axis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

In what follows, the major instrument components used in MS measurements are described.
Why is knowledge about the mass spectrometric process important to a biologist interested
in MSI? Although it may not seem obvious, understanding of the technology ensures
selection of the optimum measurement approach and the most appropriate protocols for a
specific project. As explained below, many of the measurement limitations experienced in
an MSI investigation are directly related to the characteristics of the mass measurement
process selected.
2.2 Mass Spectrometers
Mass spectrometers consist of several functionally distinct components (Fig. 2)—the ion
source, mass analyzer, and detector—with resulting signal processing/output. As mentioned
above, the characteristics of these components are what combine to give the overall figures
of merit of the measurement and determine the most appropriate system for a given
analytical challenge. More than one ion source, mass analyzer, and detector are often
integrated into a single mass spectrometer, thereby providing greater flexibility in
instrumental operating modes and enabling different types of analytes to be characterized.
Importantly, most mass spectrometers can be used for MSI if the system allows ion signal

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 3

acquisition from a number of discretely selected points and if the spatial positions of the
specimen can be recorded.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.1 Ion Sources—Perhaps no other part of the measurement process affects the
resulting data more significantly than the ionization step. Unless originally in the gas phase,
analytes need to be vaporized from a solid or liquid phase, ionized, and transferred into the
vacuum system of the mass analyzer. This vaporization process, often called desorption
(sputtering), can be fairly energetic, and can degrade/transform the analytes before they are
characterized. Vaporization can be achieved by a variety of techniques, including heating
the samples, exposing them to a high electric field or laser irradiation, and/or via
bombardment with fast atoms, or atomic or molecular ions. Ionization of analytes may occur
before, during, and after desorption. Therefore, the term desorption/ionization is commonly
used to describe the entire event. Obviously, only desorption is required to produce gaseous
neutrals, which can be ionized later using several post-ionization processes. Depending on
the characteristics of the sample and desorption/ionization processes, different sets of neutral
elements, smaller molecular fragments or intact molecules, as well as their ions, are
generated.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The resulting ions have either a positive or negative charge, and so the polarity of the
electric field applied at the ion source can determine which ions are injected into the mass
analyzer. Importantly, some analytes are more likely to form positive ions and so are easier
to characterize in the positive ion mode; others that form negative ions are more easily
characterized in the negative ion mode. Moreover, the same sample analysis using different
desorption/ionization approaches, even when coupled to the same mass analyzer, may yield
different results.
Selecting the appropriate desorption/ionization approach is critical. That decision can result
in analyte classes of a specific m/z range either being efficiently or poorly ionized, and it can
often govern the spatial resolution of the MSI method, needed sample preparation steps,
throughput and sensitivity of the analysis. Thus, many of the protocol chapters in this
volume describe specific ionization approaches and their corresponding sample preparation
steps in great detail.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Four of the most commonly used desorption/ionization methods for MSI are secondary ion
mass spectrometry (SIMS), desorption electrospray ionization (DESI), matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization (MALDI) and laser ablation (LA) with post-ionization. Other
desorption/ionization approaches such as laser desorption/ionization (LDI) (see Chapter 9,
(12)), desorption/ionization on silicon (DIOS) (13), electrospray ionization (ESI) (14), and
nanostructure-initiator mass spectrometry (NIMS) (15,16) also have great potential in MSI.
Importantly, many mass spectrometers equipped with a MALDI ion source can be used with
related ionization processes such as LDI, DIOS, LA, and laser-NIMS. Frequently, a specific
ion source arrangement is optimized for a specific mass analyzer; for example, MALDI is
often interfaced to a time-of-flight (TOF) mass analyzer (described below) although it can
also be used with ICR-based instruments.
Although many instruments are designed for a specific ion source, several can integrate a
range of sources. For instance, greater flexibility can be achieved with instruments that
allow analysis of ions generated at atmospheric (ambient) pressure (AP), where the ion
source does not require the vacuum conditions typically needed for the operation of most
mass analyzers. AP sources enable investigation of samples containing volatile compounds
that are incompatible with ion sources operating at vacuum. Some AP desorption/ionization
systems provide interchangeable ion sources, including MALDI, ESI, and DESI, making
these systems more flexible; however, this flexibility may be associated with tradeoffs in

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 4

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

performance specifications such as sensitivity. These modular ion sources are available from
a variety of vendors, as well as manufactured according to researcher specifications (see
Chapter 9 for an example of a laboratory-built ion source). In the following, the principles
of ion generation using different ion sources are briefly described. Only the major ionization
modes used for MSI are highlighted here; other sources frequently applied to mass
spectrometry are not common in imaging at this time.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.1.1 SIMS: In SIMS, a beam of fast-moving ions is aimed at the sample (Fig. 3). On
impact, these ions eject (or sputter) a variety of particles from the sample surface, including
secondary ions. The bombardment process results in formation of gas phase neutrals, ions of
both polarities, electrons, and photons. A number of primary ions are used in SIMS,
including lightweight monoatomic ions such as Au+, Ar+, Xe+, O-, O2+, Ga+, and Cs+.
Larger polyatomic cluster ion beams, such as Aun+, Bin+, C60+, and SF5+5, are also
employed; several of these result in an improved mass range of detection and sensitivity for
heavier analytes. This increase in detection mass range is related to the characteristics of
larger primary ions, which create higher ion currents and higher energy ion beams. Laser
post-ionization has become an important tool for increased ion production with semisoft
desorption by the cluster C60+ ion beam (17). Depending on the type of ion gun, the energy
of the projectiles is in the keV - MeV range, which is sufficient to form atomic and
molecular ions with m/z up to 2000 in experiments with biological specimens. When
working with biological tissues, molecular fragments such as histidine-related m/z 110,
phospholipid-related m/z 184, among others, are often detected. Primary atomic ion beams
can be focused to the nanometer diameter. As an example, 40 nm lateral resolution has been
achieved with a Ga ion gun (18). Often, the larger cluster ion beams cannot be focused as
well as their smaller ion counterparts and therefore, the probed sample spot can exceed 1
μm2. A defocused ion beam is useful in MSI, with SIMS instruments capable of operating in
the microscope mode. In this mode, the entire investigated area is probed with primary ions;
secondary ions are transferred to the detector with their relative position preserved, resulting
in the creation of a stigmatic 2D image. Much more common is the microprobe mode in
which ion signals are collected from individual spots on an area of interest and the
corresponding image recreated pixel-by-pixel.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Which primary ion flux should be considered for a particular MSI experiment? Investigation
of biological specimens by SIMS is typically carried out in the static regime, which is when
less than 1% of the sample surface, and about a nanometer of sample depth, is interrogated/
modified by ion bombardment. It corresponds to a primary ion dose that does not exceed
1013 ions/cm2. Higher-dose bombardment, or the dynamic mode, leads to greater sample
alteration due to analyte layer mixing and more molecule fragmentation. The dynamic mode
is useful for investigating elemental composition and depth profiling. Good results in sample
depth profiling were recently achieved with large cluster primary ions (19). SIMS
sputtering/ionization performance can be improved by coating the sample surface with
metals and organic substances (see Chapter 11).
Mass spectrometers equipped with SIMS ion sources are broadly used in MSI of element,
metabolite and pharmaceutical localization (see Chapters 4, 6, 11, 15, and 16), as well as
quantitative measurements of drug localization in normal and pathology-affected tissues (see
Chapter 6). SIMS imaging is very effective in imaging metabolite distribution in biological
systems. Such investigation requires significant attention to preserving analyte localization.
Therefore, sample preparation of hydrated specimens requires special consideration and is
described in the above-mentioned chapters.
2.2.1.2 Laser Desorption Approaches: Several desorption/ionization approaches use light
to vaporize and ionize analytes from liquid and solid samples. Ultraviolet (UV) and infrared
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 5

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

(IR) lasers (e.g., from the 193 nm excimer to the 10.6 μm TEA-CO2 laser) have been
employed in laser-based ion sources. The appropriate approach is selected based on sample
and/or analyte characteristics, such as mass and ionization properties; options include LA,
LDI, laser-NIMS, DIOS, or MALDI.
The LA approach is popular in elemental analyses of specimens where the laser is set to
produce light with a flux sufficient enough to completely vaporize a sample region (see
Chapter 3 and (10)). However, output of analyte ions can be low and post-ionization
methods such as inductively coupled plasma (ICP) are needed.
LDI utilizes lower intensity (I) laser pulses, I ≤ 10 MW/cm2; metabolites and relatively
large intact molecules, like peptides and some proteins, can be desorbed and ionized. An
increase in energy leads to more molecules and atoms being desorbed into the gas phase, but
results in a higher level of molecule fragmentation and loss of chemical information. IR LDI
with electrospray post-ionization has proven to be a powerful approach to determine 2D and
3D localization of metabolites in live plant leaves (see Chapter 9). Switching to a shorter
wavelength UV laser in the LDI ion source helps improve imaging lateral resolution to 10
μm and has been used to investigate distribution of UV-absorbing metabolites in plant
tissues (12). Interestingly, covering the sample with colloid silver and interrogating with
LDI results in production of intact ions of metabolites that have bound silver atoms.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Since its introduction in the early 20th century by Sir Joseph John Thomson, mass
spectrometry has been mostly applied to analyses of smaller analytes, with fewer successes
in peptide and protein research. The limiting factor had been that it is difficult to vaporize
and ionize intact proteins. However, this completely changed about 20 years ago with the
invention of soft laser desorption by Koichi Tanaka (20), matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization by Franz Hillenkamp and Michael Karas (21), as well as a critical demonstration
of the applicability of electrospray ionization to analyses of large molecules by Bennett Fenn
(22) (as described below); these ionization approaches opened the door to widespread use of
MS to measure molecules ranging from low molecular weight metabolites to megadalton
proteins, and even to small structures such as viruses. Recognizing the impact of these
achievements, Tanaka and Fenn were awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry in 2002.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

MALDI is widely employed in MSI. LDI and LA experiments have demonstrated that the
surrounding analyte environment is critical for the desorption process. Therefore, mixing of
analytes with a light absorbing matrix was shown to be beneficial for the process (Fig. 4)
(21). Upon laser irradiation, the matrix “explodes,” carrying intact analytes, some of which
are ionized. Importantly, for successful desorption/ionization, analyte particles should be in
close proximity to the matrix/buffer molecules and be spatially separated from each other,
thus making the relative concentration of analyte-to-matrix ratio a critical factor to consider.
More matrix is needed for analysis of the same number of larger molecules as compared to
smaller ones. Application of matrix to the sample surface is a critical step in MSI because it
may contribute to unwanted analyte spatial redistribution.
Which matrices should be used? For MSI, one often uses solid or liquid low molecular mass
organic matrices such as 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) and alpha-cyano cinnamic acid
(CHCA), or their mixtures (23,24). A variety of MALDI matrices have been introduced over
the years. It is interesting that different matrices have some specificity in promoting
desorption/ionization of particular types of analytes. For example, 9-aminoacridine (9-AA)
is preferable for working with metabolites (25-27). DHB is often used for desorption/
ionization of peptides and proteins, and 3-hydroxypicolinic acid (3-HPA) makes possible
oligonucleotide analysis (28). For each MALDI matrix, analyte type and sample type, the
polarity (positive or negative) of the MALDI ion source must be determined experimentally

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 6

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

in order to achieve the best results. Consider for instance that metabolite analysis with 9-AA
achieves better results in negative ion mode, while protein analysis with DHB performs
better in positive ion mode. Mixing of the matrix solution with a solution containing
analytes, or applying matrix solution onto a sample and allowing the analytes to mix with
the matrix, precedes matrix analyte cocrystallization and interrogation with the laser. Solid
matrix crystals can be also applied to dry or semidry samples with successful outcomes.
However, relative spatial localization of analyte and matrix molecules is not always clear.
Interestingly, DHB matrix solution not only works well for analyte extraction, it can also
serve as a preservation media. The antioxidant properties of DHB and the acidic
environment of the media likely combine to achieve biologically active peptide preservation
during several years of storage in the solution (29).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The MALDI process produces predominantly singly-charged ions, thereby facilitating the
processing and understanding of resulting data. Neutrals, singly-charged and multiplycharged ions, ions with elemental adducts, and those with water loss are also formed, and
may represent the dominant signal for a particular analyte. The ramification of producing
singly-charged ions is important in the discussion of mass analyzers that follows. One of the
exemplary facets of MALDI is that it produces some of the best detection limits of any
ionization method. Moreover, it performs well across a broad mass range in a wide number
of analyte and sample types, including dried droplets on a metal target and tissue samples on
a glass slide.
The diameter of the laser beam used to probe the sample surface typically determines the
effective spatial resolution of a measurement performed in microprobe mode. Obviously, the
laser beam diameter can be reduced by focusing the beam to smaller dimensions. However,
as the laser beam diameter is reduced, it illuminates a smaller area, fewer molecules of each
analyte are present within the probe beam, and so fewer molecules are ionized at each
location. Therefore, smallest diameter beams are rarely practical because the amount of
analyte that can be desorbed and ionized from a smaller sample area is not sufficient for
detection and high-accuracy mass measurement. Consequently, the laser probe diameter for
the analyses of proteins and peptides usually is larger than ten microns.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.1.3 Desorption Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry: DESI, a relatively new
ionization method that allows surfaces to be characterized under ambient conditions (30),
offers a number of interesting characteristics for imaging. A dynamic liquid buffer interface
is created on top of the sample by bombarding the sample surface with charged
microdroplets, gas phase molecules and charged clusters of solvents (e.g., a methanol/water/
acetic acid mixture) (Fig. 5). This desorbs and ionizes analytes via several means, including
electric field-related mechanisms. The analytes enter the electrostatic field formed between
the spray emitter and mass spectrometer inlet. More gaseous ions are generated at this stage
by desorption/ionization, similar to what takes place during ESI; however, the precise
mechanisms are still being determined (31,32). DESI ion sources operate in either negative
or positive ion modes. DESI produces singly-charged ions as well as series of multiplycharged ions for a single analyte. The larger the analyte, the more complex the multiplycharged ion series will be. Even though the presence of an analyte in multiple charge states
complicates qualitative and quantitative data analysis, it often assists with fragmentation of
analyte molecules, as well as permits the detection of analytes over an extended mass range.
Perhaps most importantly, production of gaseous ions with DESI often does not require
sample preparation and can be performed on almost any surface.
2.2.2 Mass Analyzers
2.2.2.1 General Principles: After the ions are created, the next step is to transfer them to
the mass analyzer. Depending on ionization mechanisms, sampling requirements, and
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 7

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

detection sensitivity and selectivity requisites, the injection of analyte ions into the mass
analyzer can be done immediately after their desorption/ionization/post-ionization, or after a
delay. A delay is implemented for different purposes, including delivery of ions from the ion
source to a distantly located mass analyzer (DESI), focusing of ions, or equalization of the
energies of identical ions (MALDI). The reasons for some of these arrangements are
discussed under the specific mass analyzers described below. After selecting the appropriate
ionization source for an experiment, the second most important decision is choosing the
right mass analyzer. Playing a key role in the separation of generated ion source ions
according to their mass, charge and, in some cases, shape, the mass analyzer also guides ions
towards the detector, or away from it. To be individually recognized, packets of ions of the
same mass and charge are separated in space/time from ions of different mass and charge.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Two ions with the same mass-to-charge ratio cannot be distinguished by the mass analyzer,
as would be the case with stereoisomers. However, these molecules can often be
distinguished by breaking the ions apart and investigating the ion fragments with another
mass analyzer. To accomplish this, mass spectrometers can be configured to store, filter and
fragment ions. Because each of these functions may require additional hardware,
contemporary multiplexed mass spectrometer systems are often hybrids and include more
than one mass analyzer, capable of multistage operation. This multiplex approach is
generally referred to as tandem mass spectrometry, or MS/MS, to describe the two stages of
analysis. Fragmentation of ions is important for analyte identification. Due to the existence
of a variety of isobaric molecules, having knowledge of the exact mass is not enough to
identify an analyte. Tandem MS improves identification via fragmentation because the
tandem mass spectrum may provide a unique profile of the product ions, representing a
molecular fingerprint. In fact, tandem MS of resulting fragments is also possible; in this
case, the term MS3 is used. This concept can be carried out even further, to create “MS to
the n” (MSn), applied when n stages of fragmentation/separation are involved in the analysis
of a single substance. Although MS12 has been performed (33), MS3 is sufficient for
identification of some structurally similar lipid species (34). Historically, the names of many
mass analyzers reflect the mechanisms of ion manipulation, details of hardware engineering,
or principles of analyte mass determination. Multiplexed mass analyzers have led to the
need to abbreviate the lengthy names of these MS systems. As a result, the lexicon of mass
spectrometrists has become filled with QTOF, QqQ, oTOF, BEBE, QQQHQCQ, and others
-- acronyms which will be explained later in the text.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

As mentioned above, MS uses electric and/or magnetic fields to determine the accurate mass
of ionized atoms and molecules. The force developed by the fields on charged particles is
described by Lorentz force law: F = q(E + v × B), where F is the force applied to the ion, q
is the charge of the ion, E is the electric field, and v × B is the vector cross-product of the
ion velocity and applied magnetic field. Change in motion of the charged particle under
influence of Lorentz force follows Newton's second law: F = ma where m is the mass of the
charged particle and a is the acceleration. Combining these two equations gives an
expression for the motion of charged particles under the influence of the fields: (m/q)a = (E
+ v × B).
It is evident from this equation that either mass-to-charge is measured, or knowledge of the
charge is required, in order to determine the mass using magnetic and/or electric fields. The
mass spectra represent the distribution of signals of different mass-to-charge ratios, or m/z.
The m/z is a dimensionless parameter where m is the mass of the particle and z represents the
number of charges; z is proportional to the charge of a single proton (e; z = q/e). Therefore,
separation and detection of ions in the mass spectrometer, as well as their representation in
the resulting mass spectra, are done in order of their mass/charge ratio. Signals of heavier
molecules with a larger charge may occur on the x-coordinate (m/z coordinate) of a mass

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 8

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

spectrum earlier than the signal of a lighter but less-charged one. Obviously, if all analyzed
ions were singly charged, this would not be important. For example, MALDI produces
predominantly singly-charged ions. However, multiply-charged ions are formed by DESI
(and at times with MALDI). Additional steps are needed to take into account the charge on a
particle; this deconvolution process is typically done automatically for most instruments.
However, for lower quality measurements, manual manipulation may be necessary.
One way that mass analyzers can be categorized is by the way they manipulate ions -continuous or pulsed. Continuous mass analyzers maintain a constant flow of ions into the
analyzer and are well suited for interface to continuous ion sources such as DESI. MALDI
uses a pulsed laser for desorption/ionization, making it compatible with pulsed mass
analyzers. Several pulsed mass analyzers, such as ion cyclotron resonance, time-of-flight
and ion traps, can accommodate continuous sources and accumulate the ions and introduce
them in pulses. The accumulation/storage time depends on system capabilities and can range
from microseconds to seconds. Magnetic sector (B), electric sector (E), and quadrupole (Q)
mass filters are continuous mass analyzers, while time-of-flight (TOF), quadrupole ion trap
(QIT), linear ion trap, Orbitrap, and ion cyclotron resonance (ICR) are discontinuous, or
pulsed analyzers. While several of the standard configurations have been mentioned, other
combinations are possible; with effort, most ion sources can be linked to most mass
analyzers.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Obviously, an ion needs to last as long as its analysis takes in the mass analyzer. Ion lifetime
is related to the quality of the vacuum system, the requirements for which vary with each
mass analyzer. The length of ion flight path and strength of the ion guiding fields, as well as
the measurement accuracy and resolution needed, combine to govern the quality of vacuum
required. A longer flight path may need a higher vacuum so as to reduce the number of
unwanted collisions between analyte ions and gaseous environmental particles. These
collisions result in a change in ion motion trajectory and/or velocity and consequently,
distortion of signal or even ion recombination and loss of signal. Although such effects can
be negative, they can also be beneficial, depending on whether the ions need to be
kinetically cooled, or to achieve controlled fragmentation. Typically, fragmentation is
performed at selected locations in the instrument by adding a collision gas into the ion flight
path collision cell or directly into the mass analyzer.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Resolution is one of the primary figures of merit provided by a mass analyzer and is the
parameter that often governs the purchase price of a system (Fig. 6). The higher the
resolution, the better the instrument will perform when assigning chemical structures to
specific signals. Another important characteristic of MS measurement is mass accuracy,
which represents the closeness of the measured mass to the true mass. Mass resolution and
mass accuracy for the same ions are predominantly determined by characteristics of the
mass analyzers and ion detectors.
High mass resolution is important for detection of isotopic distributions (Fig. 7A). A
majority of polyatomic compounds in biological specimens are composed of different
isotopes of the same combination of atoms. For a singly-charged molecule, a set of signals
(peaks) differing by 1 m/z unit will appear in the mass spectra. The first peak in the
distribution corresponds to a compound consisting of the lightest atomic isotopes, such
as 12C, 14N, 16O, and 1H. For example, the isotope 12C has a 98.9% abundance while the
abundance of 13C is only 1.1%. The mass of the molecule having the lightest atomic
isotopes is called the monoisotopic mass. Of course, for multiply-charged analytes, the
spacing of these isotopic signals depends on the charge (e.g., for a doubly-charged analyte,
the spacing will be 0.5 Da instead of 1 Da). Knowledge of the isotopic distribution aids in
analyte characterization. Fig. 7B shows a mass spectrum with two unambiguously detected

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 9

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ions of m/z 1864.3 and m/z 1882.3, where the first ion is 18 units lighter, in good accordance
with a loss of water molecule. Analyses of the peak pattern distribution in the signal series
starting with m/z 1864.3 indicates that a compound with putative m/z 1866.5 exists in the
sample. Unusual patterns of isotopic distribution also may occur due to poor instrument
performance and/or incorrect instrument settings.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Determination of mass for multiply-charged ions is possible by analysis of the isotopic
pattern distribution, where spacing between peaks is related to ion charge. Fig. 7C shows a
mass spectrum with 1 m/z spacing, indicative of a singly-charged ion, while Fig. 7D presents
a pattern with 0.5 m/z spacing, corresponding to a doubly-charged ion. The number of
charges on the ion depends on many parameters, including the ionization approach used and
the size of the particle. Larger proteins ionized with ESI may routinely have a charge of +30.
Obviously, the mass analyzer requires exceptional resolving power to determine the isotopic
distribution in this case, as the peaks are separated by 0.033 Da. Large ions with more
charges are easier to manipulate by electric and/or magnetic fields, as well as fragment for
sequence determination. However, because different molecules of the same compound may
have different charge states, complex charge-state distributions create more complex mass
spectra. This problem can be solved by forcing production of maximally charged ions with
addition of glycerol or m-nitrobenzyl alcohol to the electrospray solution (35). Currently, the
phenomenon of multiply-charged ions exists mostly for DESI-MSI. MALDI, SIMS, and LA
desorption/ionization approaches produce predominantly singly-charged ions. Different
principles are used to achieve high resolution, high throughput and measurement accuracy
among available mass analyzers. The following sections contain brief descriptions of the
mass analyzers used in MSI.
2.2.2.2 Time-of-Flight (TOF) Instruments: The mechanism of operation of a TOF mass
analyzer is fairly straightforward (Fig. 8). In what is known as the linear mode, ions are
extracted from the ion source and unidirectionally accelerated by short pulses of electrostatic
field, entering and moving in a drift space containing no field; all ions are accelerated with
the same kinetic energy. Thus, lighter ions of the same charge will move faster than heavier
ones, and therefore, come to the detector earlier; obviously, separation takes place in space
and detection in time. One of drawbacks of the linear mode is that the ions initially do not all
have the exact same position and velocity, so that there is a spread in ion arrival times at the
detector. This spatial distribution leads to formation of broad, lower amplitude signals at the
detector, resulting in reduced resolution and at times, lower sensitivity of detection.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

There are two approaches used in TOF mass analyzers to improve resolution. One is delayed
extraction (delayed injection into the mass analyzer, also called pulsed ion extraction) of the
ions formed in the MALDI ion source. This delay reduces the energy spread of the same m/z
ions. Delayed extraction parameters can be adjusted by the operator, with a longer delay
time needed for improved detection of larger molecules. Another approach utilizes reflecting
ion optics (reflector or reflectron mode) such as ion mirrors -- a set of evenly spaced
electrodes encompassing space on the ion path (Fig. 8). A single linear electric field with
higher potential energy than the source potential is formed around each electrode. Ions are
flying in these fields and are reflected (repulsed). As a result, resolution improves due to two
factors. First, there is an increase in ion path length and thus, a greater distance between
packets of ions; second, there is a reduction in the spread of kinetic energies of different
particles of the same m/z. More energetic ions will travel longer paths in the field space than
lower kinetic energy ions; therefore, they will be focused as they leave the ion mirror area,
arriving at the detector in a more temporally compact packet. Both approaches are typically
used when metabolites, peptides and small- and medium-sized proteins are analyzed.
However, the linear mode of operation with delayed extraction remains the preferred option
for analysis of large molecules and molecular aggregates.
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 10

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

TOF analyzers are common in MSI applications because of their speed of operation and
wide m/z range. They allow analysis of large singly-charged molecular ions produced by
MALDI (see Chapters 7 - 11, 14 - 20, 22 - 24, 26, and 27).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.2.3 Sector Instruments: Magnetic sector and electrostatic sector mass analyzers are
well suited for operation with continuous ion sources; the trajectories of moving ions are
curved by forces developed by the electric or magnetic fields (Fig. 9). The extent of this
curvature depends on an ion's m/z. Sector analyzers can be used to monitor a single ion with
high resolution. A narrow slit is installed between the detector and ion analyzer; the position
of the slit determines which ion is detected. A narrower slit improves mass resolution but
decreases sensitivity. Mass resolution is also dependent on the cross-section of the incoming
ion beam, the m/z ion kinetic energy spread, and the radius of ion trajectory. Different m/z
ions can be recorded simultaneously by using multiple detectors (or a detector array). Due to
fast ion transmission and low level of interaction between ions in the beam (e.g., minimal
space-charge effects leading to ion-ion repulsions), sector analyzers are capable of
quantitative measurements. Ions approach the sector analyzer as focused or defocused
beams. The latter can be refocused with a direction-focusing approach using a magnetic
sector mass analyzer (Fig. 9, inset). Electrostatic mass analyzers are efficient ion kinetic
energy filters whereas magnetic sector analyzers are capable of filtering ions with differing
momentum (Fig. 9). Therefore, hybrid instruments combining these two mass analyzers
enable double-focusing and may achieve 100,000 resolution. Double-focusing instruments
have been employed to image the distribution of elements by LA-ICP MSI (see Chapter 3).
Magnetic sector SIMS instruments (see Chapter 6), like the CAMECA IMS 7f, are capable
of distinguishing such ions as 56Fe and 28Si2, and allow direct ion microscopy (stigmatic
mode imaging) and scanning microprobe mode imaging.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.2.4 Quadrupole (Q) Instruments: The quadrupole analyzer is compatible with
continuous ion sources such as DESI. Although the upper m/z range of the quadrupole is not
high, neither is DESI well suited for desorbing high molecular weight analytes, and so the
two approaches work well together. The quadrupole, as its name suggests, consists of four
precisely aligned metal hyperbolic or cylindrical rods (Fig. 10). Superimposed direct current
(DC) and oscillating radiofrequency (RF) electric fields are used to create conditions where
ions of only a certain m/z (typically a 1 m/z mass transmission window) will have a stable
trajectory inside the device and therefore pass through it. Other ions of lower and higher m/z
will leave the analyzer prematurely or collide with the rods and skeleton. Therefore, the
quadrupole mass analyzer is a form of mass filter. The ion path in the quadrupole starts as
circular transforms to complex spiral-like propagation inside the field. Depending on the
analyzer's design, stable trajectories for ions of a particular m/z can be achieved in a
oscillating electric field by setting the appropriate RF frequency, and RF and DC voltage
amplitudes. Importantly, simultaneous change of DC and RF voltage amplitudes allows
transmission of ions of differing m/z. Keeping the RF/DC amplitude ratio constant, while
gradually and simultaneously changing the amplitudes, helps to scan/transmit ions in a broad
m/z range with a high level of selectivity. Simultaneous increase in RF and DC amplitudes is
necessary to transmit ions with larger m/z. Altering the optimal ratio will increase or
decrease the m/z window, thus impacting the selectivity of detection and mass resolution.
The quadrupole mass analyzer is relatively small, efficient and affordable. They are widely
used in gas chromatography MS (GC-MS) and liquid chromatography MS (LC-MS). A
variety of hybrid instruments exist with multiple quadrupole mass filters installed in the ion
path, including systems as complex as QQQHQCQ (Q - Quadrupole lens; H - Homogeneous
magnetic sector; C - Cylindrical electric sector). However, triple quads are most common. In
this case, the first Q selects a narrow m/z range, the second Q fragments it with RF field
energy and/or collision gas, and the third Q scans and passes the resulting fragments towards
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 11

the detector. The application of quadrupole analyzers to MSI typically has been in the role
of ion filter or collision cell in hybrid instruments (see Chapters 9 and 23).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.2.5 Ion Traps: It was recognized that the approach of creating a stable ion path using
DC and RF electric fields could also be used for ion storage. Ion traps can accumulate and
spatially contain ions, as well as release them for detection. Extended storage times allow
opportunities for ion fragmentation, detection and sorting. How does one prevent the ion
cloud from dissipating and colliding with mass analyzer surfaces? Additional fields guide
the ions along complex trajectories in a relatively small space. Different approaches for
forming these forces distinguish the types of ion traps. Quadrupole ion traps (linear and 3D)
utilize electrostatic fields and RF potentials (a Paul ion trap), and the Orbitrap (discussed in
detail below) operates with electrostatic fields (a Kingdon trap).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

The 3D quadrupole ion trap (QIT) consists of three hyperbolic-shaped electrodes
encompassing the region where the electric field is formed by RF potential applied to the
central ring electrode, and DC, supplementary RF or ground potential is established on two
end-cap electrodes (Fig. 11A). Ions of an m/z range, determined by amplitude and frequency
of the RF fields, are trapped in this region. The trapped ions have stable oscillating
trajectories in the QIT until a controlled destabilizing change in the potentials is introduced.
Such destabilization can be done for cleanup of QIT space from multiple unwanted ions
using broadband waveforms or for sending predetermined m/z ions towards the detector by
an RF scan. Similar to the Q analyzer, superimposing RF and DC potentials on the ring
electrode allows storage of single m/z ions. This feature is important in MSn experiments
where individual analytes can be selected and fragmented, the fragments selected for
detection, and/or a specific fragment selected for another round of fragmentation. Typically,
MS5 can be achieved . Ion capacity is important for MSn experiments because each
subsequent MS stage has less material for analysis than the previous stage. Increased ion
storage volume also allows for reduction of space-charge effects that may occur in situations
where the concentration of ions is high enough that they start to repel each other. The spacecharge effect often determines low mass resolution due to broadening of analyte signals and
also for formation of artifacts in mass spectra related to interactions between ions. QIT use
for MSI is described in Chapter 13.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

A variant of the ion trap is the linear version that creates a cylindrical space for the ion
cloud, linear quadruple ion traps (Fig. 11B) provide greater ion storage volume compared to
QITs. As a result, more ions can be stored with greater efficiency, allowing detection with
high resolution and increased sensitivity for a particular sample. Linear ion traps are called
2D because they utilize a two-dimensional RF field to confine ions radially. This field is
developed between four centrally located hyperbolic or cylindrical rods surrounded on both
sides by two sets of quadrupole end electrodes, which maintain DC stop potential, thereby
preventing ions from leaving the trap axially. Both 2D and 3D quadrupole ion traps can be
part of a hybrid set up, or serve as the sole mass analyzer. Pulsed ion sources are common
for ion traps in MS analyses that require longer operating sequences. However, different
instrumental configurations, as well as high speed operation, allow ions traps to be linked
with continuous ion sources without loss of sample (for an example in MSI, see Chapter
25).
2.2.2.6 Ion Cyclotron Resonance (ICR): Ion cyclotron resonance uses the principle of ions
orbiting in an ICR cell, with each ion having a characteristic frequency that depends on its
m/z. A combination of magnetic and electric fields allows separation of ions according to
their m/z. The magnetic field, created by a magnet which surrounds the ICR cell, is static
and may have different geometries (Fig. 12A). The cell has six electrodes, four of which are
used for ion containment and ion path manipulation, and two as trapping electrodes. The
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 12

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ions, whether injected or generated inside the cell, are constrained by the magnetic field as
well as the electric fields established on the trapping electrodes. Ions continuously orbit
while static electric potential restricts their axial movement. At this stage, the ions form a
diffuse ion cloud, comprised of a mix of ions of differing m/z. By applying a sequence of RF
pulses to the excitation plates, specific ions are resonantly activated and start to move in a
well-defined packet while maintaining the cyclotron trajectory. Using sequential RF pulses,
the ion packets can be synchronized. These packets of ions are measured as they repeatedly
pass near the detection plates. The detection plates are used to measure image current from
the ions, where each m/z has a unique cyclotron frequency that depends on the mass and
charge of the ions. Higher m/z ions will appear less frequently. The timing of the image
currents represents a frequency recording of the ions in the detection cell; the more transits
of each ion, the more accurately the frequencies can be determined. The frequencies are
converted into a more conventional mass spectrum using a Fourier transform (FT).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

ICR is known for achieving the highest mass resolution (m/Δmx, quoted as resolving power
in some publications), as one example, reaching 8 million for 8.6 kDa bovine ubiquitin (36).
ICR resolution increases linearly with the increasing strength of the magnetic field.
Therefore, large magnets, up to 25 Tesla, are employed in FT-ICR MS (37). A resolution
(m/Δm50%) of 200,000 for a 14.5 Tesla instrument at m/z 400 at a 1 Hz measurement rate
has been reported (38). ICR mass analyzers became powerful tools in proteomics
investigations with the advent of top-down (intact proteins are analyzed) and bottom-up
(peptides of enzymatically digested proteins are analyzed) approaches. A large variety of ion
fragmentation approaches are available for ICR, although these are less common in MSI.
This is due in part to its limited m/z range (typically not over ~10 KDa); however, ICR
works well with ESI when multiply charged ions are generated so that a much higher mass
range can be interrogated. This limitation is much more severe in MSI when using MALDI
because it generates mostly singly charged ions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.2.7 The Orbitrap: Recently, a compact but powerful mass analyzer -- the Orbitrap -was introduced (Fig. 12B) (39). Using a balance between the centripetal influence of an
electrostatic field developed on a central electrode and the opposite centrifugal force of ions
rapidly injected and moving in the mass analyzer, the Orbitrap produces packets of ions
according to their m/z. The trajectory of ion motion inside the Orbitrap resembles a complex
spiral orbiting alongside the central electrode. The axial component of this motion is
dependent on the mass and charge of a particle. Therefore, recording the image current
generated by the motion of different m/z ion packets produces a complex record of change of
current amplitude over time. Again, a Fourier transform allows the conversion into relative
signal intensity versus m/z. The Orbitrap employs relatively new technology and at its
current stage of development is capable of producing a resolution of >100,000 at m/z 400 for
a 1.5 s acquisition time, or 60,000 at a 1 Hz acquisition rate. This capability allows
determination of the localization of analytes with similar m/z values, in particular using the
protocol described in Chapter 25.
2.2.3 Detectors—After the ions are separated or processed, they need to be detected. For
several mass analyzers, ion detection is integral to mass analyzer operation as is true for the
ICR instrument. Here we briefly describe one of the most common ion detectors.
Moving ions produce signals in detectors on impact or by creating electric currents. A
number of types of electron multipliers are used in mass spectrometers. As an example, a
microchannel electron multiplier plate has a large array of 5 - 10 micrometer diameter
channels which may occupy an area >10 cm2. Ions strike the detector's surface inside an
individual channel, thereby inducing secondary electron and photon emission. The
efficiency of this process depends on the kinetic energy of incoming ions, incident angle of
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 13

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

impact, and detector surface properties. Secondary electrons continue to move toward the
detector and strike tunnel walls, again inducing more electrons. This effect can multiply the
number of ions by more than a million fold. The process continues along the channel until
electrons reach a conductor, which transmits this electric current to amplifiers and further
signal processing. Detectors operate at vacuum conditions usually below 10-5 torr. However,
new technologies for generation of curved channels in channel electron multipliers has
resulted in an ion detector that is operational at 10-2 torr
(http://www.detechinc.com/em/quad.htm). Importantly, the ion detectors of some mass
spectrometers can bereplaced/updated, translating into significant improvements in detection
capabilities.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Why is it important to understand how the detector works? Many mass spectrometers have
the option of adjusting detector sensitivity. Increasing the sensitivity may help to observe
more compounds and aid in the detection of low-abundance analytes. Unfortunately,
detector operation at a higher sensitivity setting can increase the noise level and reduce the
lifetime of the detector. In addition, if the detector is set at a higher sensitivity and intense
signals are present, this can degrade detector performance. High spatial resolution MS
imaging requires significant dynamic range and often the detector is optimized for low
analyte levels at each probed spot. Thus, detector performance can degrade during the
hundreds of thousands of acquisitions that take place when creating a number of larger ion
images.
What is next? The signals produced by detectors are digitized, processed and converted to
mass spectra. MS imaging experiments may generate thousands of mass spectra containing
information on hundreds of signals acquired from specimens. Obviously, it is not possible to
check individual mass spectrum quality. Therefore, data analysis in MSI experiments is
mostly done using final ion images. Such analysis may generate false-positive signal
detection due to a variety of factors, including issues as shown in Fig. 13. Different baseline
correction, denoising, and intelligent peak picking algorithms are implemented for batch
mass spectra processing in MSI (40,41) (see Chapters 1, 22 and 27). Nevertheless, a
random check of several of the original mass spectra is an important step during data
analysis.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

2.2.4 Calibration—Mass spectrometers are complex systems and many parameters can be
optimized according to experimental requirements. These adjustments, as well as possible
drift in the calibration of different components, may lead to measurement of analyte m/z
with a systematic error. Therefore, calibration of the mass scale is often performed using
standards, often more than three; this compensates for these deleterious effects and results in
a more accurate m/z scale. During automatic or manual calibration, standards with known
masses and predictable charge are measured, differences between determined mass and true
mass are found, and a set of calibration constants created. These constants become part of
the m/z calibration during subsequent measurements performed with the same instrumental
settings with unknown analytes.
Internal, external or mass defect-based calibration can be performed (42). External
calibration is done with mixtures of standards measured separately from analyzed unknown
samples. In contrast, internal calibration requires the presence of calibrants in the sample.
Importantly, if the m/z of endogenous analytes are known, they can be used to calibrate the
mass spectrometer. This type of calibration is preferable because no increase in complexity
of sample occurs and influences from different parameters, such as sample thickness and
analyte environment, are accounted for. As an example, trypsin autocleavage molecular ions
are used for calibration in proteomics research (43), as is mass defect-based calibration,
where peptides of enzymatically cleaved proteins are used for calibration and protein

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 14

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

identifications (42,44). The latter approach is also useful for determination and subsequent
elimination of nonpeptide species from peak lists. Calibrant selection is governed by several
requirements, including the nature of targeted analytes, investigated m/z range, type of mass
spectrometer, and calibration approach. Unique, exogenous calibrants are preferable for
internal calibration when endogenous calibrants are not available. Using analytes that can be
endogenously present in an investigated sample for calibration is discouraged due to the
possibility of ambiguous experimental outcomes, as well as accidental contamination of
other samples. High-quality calibration is achieved with calibrants that bracket the mass of
the analyte of interest. After their acquisition, individual mass spectra can be recalibrated
employing different calibration profiles. However, recalibration of complex MSn spectra, or
an entire set of mass spectra obtained during an MS imaging experiment, can be difficult.
Therefore, it is important to verify calibration before performing an imaging experiment
using the appropriate standards.

3. Conclusions

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Mass spectrometry provides a set of tools with versatile and powerful figures of merit. When
used under the control of appropriate operating protocols, many MS-platforms can be used
for MSI. The large number of data-points in an image, and the complex matrix of working
directly with tissue samples, can place severe performance constraints on an MSI
experiment. Nonetheless, the rapid increase in the performance of ion sources, mass
analyzers, and detectors has led to a new generation of sensitive, high resolution, and
relatively easy to use mass spectrometers. These are now providing unmatched capabilities
for chemical imaging. The mature mass spectrometry field provides biologists with a variety
of novel imaging modalities that are appropriate for a number of applications. While there is
no single MS-based tool that is ideal for all analytes, the assortment of instruments now
available allows a broad range of samples to be probed. In the following chapters, specific
protocols are described in much greater detail.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Kevin Tucker for helpful discussion of the chapter and Stephanie Baker for her
help with the manuscript preparation. This material is based upon work supported by Award No. P30DA018310
from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does
not necessarily represent the official views of NIDA or the National Institutes of Health.

References
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

1. Burlingame, AL. Methods in Enzymolology. Elsevier Academic Press; Amsterdam; Boston: 2005.
Mass spectrometry: modified proteins and glycoconjugates.
2. Chance, M., editor. Mass Spectrometry Analysis for Protein-Protein Interactions and Dynamics.
John Wiley & Sons; Hoboken, N.J.: 2008.
3. Downard, K., editor. Mass Spectrometry of Protein Interactions. Wiley Interscience; Hoboken, N.J.:
2007.
4. Lipton, MS.; Páya-Tolic, L. Mass Spectrometry of Proteins and Peptides: Methods and Protocols.
Humana Press; Springer, distributor; New York, N.Y.; London: 2009.
5. Matthiesen, R., editor. Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis in Proteomics. Humana Press; Totowa,
N.J.: 2007.
6. Murphy, RC. Mass Spectrometry of Lipids. Plenum Press; New York, NY: 1993.
7. Sparkman, OD. Mass Spec Desk Reference. 2nd ed.. Global View Publishing; Pittsburgh, PA: 2006.
8. Wanner, KT.; Höfner, G., editors. Mass Spectrometry in Medicinal Chemistry: Applications in Drug
Discovery. Wiley-VCH; John Wiley (distributor); Weinheim; Chichester: 2007.
9. McLafferty, FW.; Turecek, F. Interpretation of Mass Spectra. University Science Books; Mill
Valley, CA: 1993.

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 15

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

10. Becker, JS. Inorganic Mass Spectrometry: Principles and Applications. John Wiley & Sons,
Chichester; England; Hoboken, NJ: 2007.
11. De Podesta, M. Understanding the Properties of Matter. Taylor & Francis; London; New York:
2001.
12. Holscher D, Shroff R, Knop K, Gottschaldt M, Crecelius A, Schneider B, Heckel DG, Schubert
US, Svatos A. Matrix-free UV-laser desorption/ionization (LDI) mass spectrometric imaging on
the single-cell level: distribution of secondary metabolites of Arabidopsis thaliana and Hypericum
species. Plant J. 2009; 60:907–918. [PubMed: 19732382]
13. Liu Q, Guo Z, He L. Mass spectrometry imaging of small molecules using desorption/ionization on
silicon. Anal Chem. 2007; 79:3535–3541. [PubMed: 17428031]
14. Van Berkel GJ, Kertesz V, Koeplinger KA, Vavrek M, Kong AN. Liquid microjunction surface
sampling probe electrospray mass spectrometry for detection of drugs and metabolites in thin
tissue sections. J Mass Spectrom. 2008; 43:500–508. [PubMed: 18035855]
15. Northen TR, Yanes O, Northen MT, Marrinucci D, Uritboonthai W, Apon J, Golledge SL,
Nordstrom A, Siuzdak G. Clathrate nanostructures for mass spectrometry. Nature. 2007;
449:1033–1036. [PubMed: 17960240]
16. Yanes O, Woo HK, Northen TR, Oppenheimer SR, Shriver L, Apon J, Estrada MN, Potchoiba MJ,
Steenwyk R, Manchester M, Siuzdak G. Nanostructure initiator mass spectrometry: tissue imaging
and direct biofluid analysis. Anal Chem. 2009; 81:2969–2975. [PubMed: 19301920]
17. Willingham D, Kucher A, Winograd N. Molecular depth profiling and imaging using cluster ion
beams with femtosecond laser postionization. Appl Surf Sci. 2008; 255:831–833.
18. Sakamoto T, Koizumi M, Kawasaki J, Yamaguchi J. Development of a high lateral resolution
TOF-SIMS apparatus for single particle analysis. Appl Surf Sci. 2008; 255:1617–1620.
19. Wucher A, Cheng J, Zheng L, Winograd N. Three-dimensional depth profiling of molecular
structures. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2009; 393:1835–1842. [PubMed: 19153718]
20. Tanaka K. The origin of macromolecule ionization by laser irradiation (Nobel lecture). Angew
Chem Int Ed Engl. 2003; 42:3860–3870. [PubMed: 12949860]
21. Hillenkamp F, Karas M. Mass spectrometry of peptides and proteins by matrix-assisted ultraviolet
laser desorption/ionization. Methods Enzymol. 1990; 193:280–295. [PubMed: 1963669]
22. Fenn J. Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry: how it all began. J Biomol Tech. 2002; 13:101–
118. [PubMed: 19498975]
23. Cornett DS, Reyzer ML, Chaurand P, Caprioli RM. MALDI imaging mass spectrometry:
molecular snapshots of biochemical systems. Nat Methods. 2007; 4:828–833. [PubMed:
17901873]
24. Kaletas BK, van der Wiel IM, Stauber J, Guzel C, Kros JM, Luider TM, Heeren RM. Sample
preparation issues for tissue imaging by imaging MS. Proteomics. 2009; 9:2622–2633. [PubMed:
19415667]
25. Seetharaman V, Royston G. Quantitative detection of metabolites using matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization mass spectrometry with 9-aminoacridine as the matrix. Rapid Commun
Mass Spectrom. 2007; 21:2072–2078. [PubMed: 17546650]
26. Rachal LV-S, David MH. 9-Aminoacridine as a matrix for negative mode matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2002; 16:1575–1581.
27. Edwards JL, Kennedy RT. Metabolomic analysis of eukaryotic tissue and prokaryotes using
negative mode MALDI time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Anal Chem. 2005; 77:2201–2209.
[PubMed: 15801754]
28. Liu Y, Sun X, Guo B. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight analysis of lowconcentration oligonucleotides and mini-sequencing products. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom.
2003; 17:2354–2360. [PubMed: 14558138]
29. Romanova EV, Rubakhin SS, Sweedler JV. One-step sampling, extraction, and storage protocol
for peptidomics using dihydroxybenzoic acid. Anal Chem. 2008; 80:3379–3386. [PubMed:
18321135]
30. Takats Z, Wiseman JM, Gologan B, Cooks RG. Mass spectrometry sampling under ambient
conditions with desorption electrospray ionization. Science. 2004; 306:471–473. [PubMed:
15486296]

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 16

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

31. Manicke NE, Wiseman JM, Ifa DR, Cooks RG. Desorption electrospray ionization (DESI) mass
spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) of phospholipids and sphingolipids:
ionization, adduct formation, and fragmentation. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom. 2008; 19:531–543.
[PubMed: 18258448]
32. Wiseman JM, Ifa DR, Venter A, Cooks RG. Ambient molecular imaging by desorption
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Nat Protoc. 2008; 3:517–524. [PubMed: 18323820]
33. Lundstrom SL, D'Alexandri FL, Nithipatikom K, Haeggstrom JZ, Wheelock AM, Wheelock CE.
HPLC/MS/MS-based approaches for detection and quantification of eicosanoids. Methods Mol
Biol. 2009; 579:161–187. [PubMed: 19763475]
34. Houjou T, Yamatani K, Nakanishi H, Imagawa M, Shimizu T, Taguchi R. Rapid and selective
identification of molecular species in phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin by conditional
neutral loss scanning and MS3. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2004; 18:3123–3130. [PubMed:
15565732]
35. Iavarone AT, Jurchen JC, Williams ER. Supercharged protein and peptide ions formed by
electrospray ionization. Anal Chem. 2001; 73:1455–1460. [PubMed: 11321294]
36. Shi SD, Hendrickson CL, Marshall AG. Counting individual sulfur atoms in a protein by ultrahighresolution Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry: experimental resolution
of isotopic fine structure in proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U.S.A. 1998; 95:11532–11537. [PubMed:
9751700]
37. Shi SDH, Drader JJ, Hendrickson CL, Marshall AG. Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
mass spectrometry in a high homogeneity 25 tesla resistive magnet. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom.
1999; 10:265–268.
38. Schaub TM, Hendrickson CL, Horning S, Quinn JP, Senko MW, Marshall AG. High-performance
mass spectrometry: Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance at 14.5 tesla. Anal Chem. 2008;
80:3985–3990. [PubMed: 18465882]
39. Makarov A, Denisov E, Kholomeev A, Balschun W, Lange O, Strupat K, Horning S. Performance
evaluation of a hybrid linear ion trap/orbitrap mass spectrometer. Anal Chem. 2006; 78:2113–
2120. [PubMed: 16579588]
40. Jardin-Mathe O, Bonnel D, Franck J, Wisztorski M, Macagno E, Fournier I, Salzet M. MITICS
(MALDI Imaging Team Imaging Computing System): a new open source mass spectrometry
imaging software. J Proteomics. 2008; 71:332–345. [PubMed: 18644473]
41. Broersen A, van Liere R, Altelaar AF, Heeren RM, McDonnell LA. Automated, feature-based
image alignment for high-resolution imaging mass spectrometry of large biological samples. J Am
Soc Mass Spectrom. 2008; 19:823–832. [PubMed: 18403214]
42. Hjerno K, Hojrup P. Calibration of matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight
peptide mass fingerprinting spectra. Methods Mol Biol. 2007; 367:49–60. [PubMed: 17185769]
43. Luo Q, Nieves E, Kzhyshkowska J, Angeletti RH. Endogenous transforming growth factor-beta
receptor-mediated Smad signaling complexes analyzed by mass spectrometry. Mol Cell
Proteomics. 2006; 5:1245–1260. [PubMed: 16582422]
44. Wolski WE, Farrow M, Emde AK, Lehrach H, Lalowski M, Reinert K. Analytical model of
peptide mass cluster centres with applications. Proteome Sci. 2006; 4:18. [PubMed: 16995952]

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 17

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 1.

Schematic of the generalized mass spectrometry imaging process utilizing the microprobe
mode of operation. The major steps involved include sample preparation and interrogation
with a probe, signal acquisition, processing, and final image formation. Distribution of a
single or multiple analytes is determined in an array of spots covering the sample surface.
Only two mass spectra containing signals from different analytes are shown in the signal
acquisition step. Detected signal intensity is often encoded by color or grayscale. Here, the
more intense signal is presented in the color black, which provides the most contrast from
the background color.

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 18

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 2.

Principal schematic of a mass spectrometer with atmospheric pressure ionization (API). In
many mass spectrometers, the ion source operates under a vacuum, while in API, the
ionization occurs under ambient/atmospheric pressure.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 19

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 3.

Schematic of SIMS ion source operation.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 20

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 4.

Schematic of ion generation in the MALDI ion source.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 21

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 5.

Schematic of the desorption electrospray ionization (DESI) process (see text for details).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 22

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 6.

Figures of merit for defining mass analyzers: accuracy, resolution (R), and resolving power
(RP). These parameters are used to compare the performance of different MS approaches.
An idealized mass spectrum containing two peaks with m/z values M and M1 shown in the
center of the figure. The resolution represents how close the m/z of two peaks can be before
they overlap and cannot be distinguished. Resolving power is the inverse, and is a measure
of the ability of a mass spectrometer to separate different ions. Signal processing, such as
filtering and baseline correction, influence final data sets and hence, the resolution value
calculated from raw data will be different from that from processed data. ΔM can be
measured at other signal intensity levels, e.g., 10%. ΔMFWHM represents the full width of
the peak at half its maximum (FWHM) height; ppm = parts per million. Importantly, there
are a variety of resolution and resolving power definitions which may even contradict each
other (http://goldbook.iupac.org, (7,9)).

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 23

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 7.

High resolution mass spectrometry enables determination of isotopic distributions. A.
Overlaid mass spectra of a compound with a monoisotopic mass of 1802 Da
(monoprotonated [M+H] = m/z 1803) and an average mass of 1802.6. Differing resolutions
of detection are indicated. B. Mass spectrum containing two different m/z ions and one
putative ion at m/z 1866.5. C. Mass spectrum of the isotopic distribution of a singly-charged
molecular ion. D. Mass spectrum of the isotopic distribution of a doubly-charged molecular
ion.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 24

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 8.

Schematics of co-axial geometry time-of-flight (TOF) mass analyzer operation in linear and
reflector modes. A simplified equation describing the TOF process is presented in the insert.
m = mass of the ion, V = acceleration voltage, d = length of flight path, t = time from the
moment of ion acceleration to the detection event.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 25

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 9.

General schematic of a sector mass analyzer. Ions extracted from the ion source are
accelerated by an electrostatic field (accelerating potential, V) and enter the sector analyzer
with velocity, v. Electric (electric flux density, E) or magnetic (magnetic flux density, B)
fields bend the trajectory of the ions into curved paths with radius, r. Trajectories of ions
with larger m/z are affected more than smaller ones. An illustration of the direction-focusing
ion beam approach in a magnetic sector mass analyzer is shown in the insert. Due to the
dependence of the radius of an ion's trajectory on its kinetic energy (E) in the electrostatic
sector mass analyzer, and on its momentum (mv) in the magnetic sector mass analyzer, the
systems are also referred to as ion energy and ion momentum filters.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 26

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 10.

The quadrupole mass analyzer is an ion filtering device that creates an oscillating electric
field between four rods. A. Schematic of a quadrupole mass analyzer. -(U + Vcos ω t) and +
(U + Vcosωt) are cumulative potential created by superimposed direct current potential (U)
and radiofrequency current potential (Vcosωt). B. The encircled equation describes an area
of stability for a particular m/z ion trajectory (ω = circular frequency; r0 = field radius)
depicted on the graph.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 27

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Fig. 11.

Quadrupole ion traps provide a versatile approach for storage, fragmentation, and selection
of ions. A. Schematic of 3-D quadrupole ion trap consisting of a ring electrode and two endcap electrodes. Only one ion ejection pathway is shown. A combination of DC and RF
potentials is applied to the electrodes. 1 mtorr of helium is typically added to the mass
analyzer. B. Schematic of a linear quadrupole ion trap. During ion trapping, DC and RF ionguiding potentials are maintained on the central electrodes while the end section electrodes
maintain stop potential, SP.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 28

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 12.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

High resolution mass spectrometric analyses are achieved with ion cyclotron resonance
(ICR) and Orbitrap mass analyzers. A. Schematic of an ICR mass analyzer consisting of a
magnet surrounding a cylindrical ICR cell formed by three pairs of electrodes (two trapping
electrodes are not shown), electronic circuitries for detection of the ion image current, and
generation of RF and DC potentials. Three stages of ion separation and detection are marked
with numbers: 1 - initial electrostatic trapping (no RF is applied), 2 - cyclotron motion when
RF is used to resonantly excite ions of a particular m/z and move them to higher orbit, and 3
-detection phase when RF is turned off and detection plates are engaged to sense ion
packets. The equation shows the dependence of cyclotron frequency on mass (m) and charge
(z) of an analyte ion moving in the magnetic field of strength, B. B. Schematic
representation of an Orbitrap mass analyzer. A central electrode is surrounded by one outer
electrode, which is divided into two halves by nonconductive space. Although different
approaches are implemented for ion detection with the Orbitrap, only one is shown here. A
simplified equation describing the frequency of axial oscillations in the mass analyzer
demonstrates that this parameter - ωZ - can be used for determination of mass (m) to charge
(q) ratio. k = field curvature; φ = rotation; Z and r = coordinate axes. Both analyzers are
operating at vacuum conditions.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

Rubakhin and Sweedler

Page 29

NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Fig. 13.

NIH-PA Author Manuscript

Factors complicating analysis of MSI experiment results. A. Formation of alkali metal
adducts. Sodium and potassium adducts are marked on the mass spectrum. These can occur
in a region-specific manner in an MSI image. B. Detector saturation. Mass spectra acquired
with different laser fluencies (the total energy per unit area). Note lost resolution on the
major peak and improved detection of lower intensity peaks as a result of fluency increase
(lower trace). C. Curved baseline shape, chemical and/or digitization noise may produce
false-positive peak detection during the automatic peak picking process. Mass spectrum
shows an elevated baseline and high level of chemical noise (left inset) in the lower m/z
range, mixed chemical and digitization noises in the middle range (central inset), and only
digitization noise in the higher m/z region.

Methods Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 April 7.

