HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Mol Cell. 2015 May 21; 58(4): 699–706. doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2015.04.021.

Defining the Metabolome: Size, Flux, and Regulation
Nicola Zamboni1, Alan Saghatelian2, and Gary J Patti3
1Institute

Author Manuscript

of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland 2Clayton
Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, United States 3Department of Genetics, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Medicine, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA Department of Chemistry, Washington University, St. Louis,
MO 63130, USA

Author Manuscript

Renewed interest in metabolic research over the last two decades has inspired an explosion
of technological developments for studying metabolism. At the forefront of methodological
innovation is an approach referred to as “untargeted” or “discovery” metabolomics. The
experimental objective of this technique is to comprehensively measure the entire
metabolome, which constitutes a largely undefined set of molecules. Given its potential
comprehensive coverage, untargeted metabolomics is often the first choice of experiments
for investigators pursuing a metabolic research question. It is important to recognize,
however, that untargeted metabolomics may not always be the optimal experimental
approach. Conventionally, untargeted metabolomics only provides information about relative
differences in metabolite pool sizes. Therefore, depending on the specific scientific question
at hand, a complementary approach involving stable isotopes (such as metabolic flux
analysis) may be better suited to provide biological insights. Unlike untargeted
metabolomics, stable-isotope methods can provide information about differences in reaction
rates.

Author Manuscript

So which metabolic research questions are best tailored for each of the various experimental
approaches? What are the limitations of untargeted metabolomics? What are the challenges
of metabolic flux analysis? How have each been successfully applied? Research
investigators Gary Patti, Nicola Zamboni, and Alan Saghatelian address these questions in
the vignettes that follow. First, Gary Patti discusses opportunities and challenges of
untargeted metabolomics within the framework of potential unknown metabolites in “How
Big is the Metabolome? Opportunities and Challenges”. Next, Nicola Zamboni describes the
power of metabolic flux analysis and explores its most frequent limitations and pitfalls in
“Modern Stable-Isotope Metabolic Flux Analysis”. Finally, Alan Saghatelian contrasts
different instrumentation platforms available for metabolite measurements and highlights

Correspondence to: Nicola Zamboni; Gary J Patti.
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Zamboni et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

some successful applications of both metabolomics and metabolic flux analysis in
“Biological Lessons from Metabolite Profiling”.

How Big Is the Metabolome? Opportunities and Challenges
Gary J. Patti
In 1955, Donald Nicholson compiled all of the metabolic reactions known at that time into a
single chart. This chart, which he drew by hand with stencils, provided the first perspective
of a comprehensive cellular metabolome. The rendering displayed only about 20 metabolic
pathways.(Nicholson, 1970)

Author Manuscript

The majority of metabolic pathways taught in today’s undergraduate biochemistry
curriculum had been discovered and mapped onto comprehensive charts by the 1960’s.
There was a growing perception that the picture of the cellular metabolome was complete. In
1964, Nobel laureate Ernst Boris Chain offered his perspective on the greatest landmarks in
biochemical research. He listed one major achievement as the elucidation of biochemical
pathways.(Chain, 1965) Chain categorized the success of elucidating pathways into three
historical eras: (i) the “pre-isotope era” in which the enzyme activities of pathways were
determined in cell-free extracts, (ii) the “isotope era” in which metabolite transformations
were mapped with tracers, and (iii) the “era of biochemical genetics” where the expression
of biosynthetic enzymes were manipulated to establish reaction sequences.(Chain, 1965)

Author Manuscript

This perspective that the complete cellular metabolome had been elucidated did not evolve
greatly until recently when researchers began applying cutting-edge mass spectrometry to
study metabolism comprehensively. The results have been unexpected. Thousands of signals
can be detected from the metabolic extracts of biological samples whose masses do not
match any of those predicted based on the conventional biochemical charts. Data from this
new experimental approach, termed “metabolomics”, have challenged the idea that the
picture of cellular metabolism is complete. While it is unclear at this time precisely how
many unknown metabolites are represented in metabolomic data, already metabolomic
technologies have been applied to discover new metabolites and unexpected pathway fluxes
that have important physiological relevance.(Dang et al., 2009; Kalisiak et al., 2009; Mathe
et al., 2014; Patti et al., 2012a; Yore et al., 2014)
With the rise of metabolomics, a new era of biochemical discovery has begun. For the first
time in several decades, excitement to discover new metabolites and pathways is at the
forefront of biological research.(McKnight, 2010)

Author Manuscript

The unknown metabolome: a love and hate relationship—There are several
technological platforms available for performing metabolomics, but liquid chromatography/
mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is most commonly used for discovery (i.e., untargeted)
experiments because thousands of signals are routinely detected from the metabolic extract
of a biological sample.(Patti et al., 2012b) The biggest challenge in performing discovery
metabolomic experiments is translating these signals, termed features, into metabolite
identities. While there are certainly more resources available now compared to ten years ago,
the process of making metabolite identifications is still low throughput. It is common to

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

spend weeks to months analyzing each metabolomic dataset and, even then, only a relatively
small number (<20) of metabolite identifications are often made.

Author Manuscript

The possibility that hundreds or thousands of LC/MS signals might correspond to unknown
metabolites that have yet to be described is one of the most exciting aspects of performing
discovery metabolomics. This possibility is also the single reason that performing
metabolomics is so challenging. For example, consider a situation where there is interest in
identifying an ion with a mass-to-charge value of 808.118 as detected in negative-ionization
mode. The first step would be searching the value of 808.118 in metabolomic databases such
as METLIN and HMDB.(Tautenhahn et al., 2012a; Wishart et al., 2009) Given that modern
mass spectrometers can routinely measure mass-to-charge ratios of metabolites with an error
of 25 ppm or less, the databases would be searched for candidate compounds over the massto-charge interval 808.098–808.138. Currently, the only hit returned from this search is
acetyl-CoA. Yet, because there may be unknown metabolites with mass-to-charge values
within this interval that have not been input into metabolomic databases, this result would
not substantiate identifying the ion with a mass-to-charge value of 808.118 as acetyl-CoA.
Without a complete parts list of the metabolome, accurate mass is never sufficient to
confidently identify a metabolite.

Author Manuscript

Instead, to reliably identify a metabolite, its mass-to-charge value, chromatographic
retention time, isotopic pattern, and fragmentation data are generally used together in
combination.(Patti et al., 2012b) The sum of this information is highly specific to a
compound and therefore it is unlikely that any two metabolites, known or unknown, produce
the same set of data. Using retention time and fragmentation data to identify metabolites,
however, leads to some major experimental challenges. The remainder of my discussion is
dedicated to briefly describing some bioinformatic resources that have been developed to
help with the process.

Author Manuscript

Metabolomics on the cloud—One of the most widely used software packages for
processing raw LC/MS-based metabolomic data is a program called XCMS. Just five years
ago, installation and operation of XCMS required familiarity with the R programing
language. Recently, however, a cloud-based version of XCMS was developed called XCMS
Online that uses an intuitive graphical interface.(Tautenhahn et al., 2012b) Metabolomic data
are uploaded to the XCMS Online server much like files are uploaded as an attachment to an
email. After the data are processed, the results are integrated with the METLIN database so
that candidates for the metabolite identities of each signal (i.e., feature) are listed. The
candidate list is produced on the basis of each feature’s mass-to-charge value. As discussed
above, the mass-to-charge value of a feature alone is insufficient to substantiate a metabolite
identification. To facilitate metabolite assignments based on fragmentation data, a number of
metabolomic databases such as METLIN, HMDB, and MassBank have begun incorporating
experimental fragmentation data acquired from model standards.(Horai et al., 2010;
Tautenhahn et al., 2012a; Wishart et al., 2009) At this time, the METLIN database contains
fragmentation data for more than 12,000 model standards. Current efforts are focused on
further integrating XCMS Online and METLIN so that metabolite assignments can be made
during data processing that are based on both mass-to-charge values and fragmentation data,

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

an approach that has been referred to as autonomous metabolomics.(Benton et al., 2014;
Tautenhahn et al., 2012a)

Author Manuscript

Credentialing features: honey, I shrunk the metabolome—In a typical discovery
profiling experiment performed with LC/MS-based technologies, thousands of features are
routinely detected from most biological samples. When the mass-to-charge ratios of each
detected feature are searched against metabolomic databases, a surprisingly small fraction
provide database hits. The challenge with interpreting this result with respect to the size of
the unknown metabolome is that each feature detected does not necessarily correspond to a
different metabolite. As a consequence, the number of “unknown” compounds detected is
overestimated upon simple inspection. For example, naturally occurring isotopes can result
in one metabolite species being detected as multiple features. Mostly, this results from the
relatively high concentration of 13C that occurs naturally and results in a mass shift. Another
reason a metabolite can produce multiple features is because metabolites can ionize as
several adducts. That is, in addition to being detected as [M+H]+, metabolites might also be
detected as [M+Na]+, [M+NH4]+, etc. Further, metabolites can sometimes fragment or form
non-covalent interactions with other metabolites when entering the mass spectrometer. This
too inflates the feature count independent of the number of metabolites present.

Author Manuscript

Most features corresponding to isotopes, adducts, and fragments can be readily identified by
using software programs such as CAMERA.(Kuhl et al., 2012) But even after these
processing steps, the number of features detected can still be larger than the number of
metabolites present due to artifacts associated with contaminants, chemical noise, and
bioinformatic noise. To identify and remove these artifactual features, isotopic labeling
methods such as credentialing and isotope-ratio outlier analysis have been developed.
(Mahieu et al., 2014; Stupp et al., 2013) In brief, identical samples with and without 13C
labels are mixed. Features of biological origin consequently produce a unique isotopic
pattern in the mass spectra, whereas artifactual features do not. Features with the appropriate
isotopic patterns are said to be “credentialed”.

Author Manuscript

It is important to highlight that even when these extensive filtering strategies are applied to
Escherichia coli, there remain hundreds of credentialed features whose mass-to-charge
values do not return any matches in current metabolomic databases.(Mahieu et al., 2014) Of
course, it is possible that some credentialed features returning database hits are themselves
unknowns that have matching mass-to-charge values but do not have matching structures.
Alternatively, it may be that some credentialed features not returning database hits are
known metabolites that have undergone an extracellular transformation (e.g., during the
extraction process). Only after every credentialed feature is structurally characterized will a
definitive calculation of the number of unknowns detected be possible. Certainly the results
are expected to be at least partially organism specific. The credentialing experiments
performed thus far, however, suggest that the number of unknown metabolites detected by
LC/MS-based metabolomics is much smaller than the thousands of features without
database hits appearing in the raw data prior to filtering.
The “metabolomics era” of biochemical pathway elucidation—In 1955,
Nicholson provided the first picture of the comprehensive cellular metabolome by
Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

constructing a chart connecting the ~20 biochemical pathways that had then been
characterized. By 1970, Nicholson’s chart contained just over 400 metabolites. Today,
comprehensive metabolic charts have expanded to now include more than four times as
many metabolites.(Ogata et al., 1999; Thiele et al., 2013) The introduction of new
technologies for studying metabolism has raised the question of how complete even that
picture is.

Author Manuscript

Undoubtedly, advances in mass spectrometry-based metabolomics have reinvigorated
research in metabolite discovery. The extent to which metabolomic technologies will impact
the canonical view of comprehensive metabolism in textbooks remains to be seen, but it is
interesting to consider that we have entered a new period of biochemical research. Recall
that Chain organized the history of pathway discovery into three periods: the pre-isotope era,
the isotope era, and the era of biochemical genetics. Building upon Chain’s perspective, we
might say that we have entered a fourth era of elucidating biochemical pathways: the
“metabolomics era”. In most cases, understanding how newly discovered metabolites
integrate into our current comprehensive chart of metabolism will require using stable
isotopes and metabolic flux analysis as described by Nicola Zamboni below.

Modern Stable-Isotope Metabolic Flux Analysis
Nicola Zamboni

Author Manuscript

While untargeted metabolite profiling approaches have yielded many important insights into
a multitude of biological problems and may potentially lead to an update of our perspective
of the number of metabolites present in a cell, conventional untargeted metabolomic
experiments generally only provide information about metabolite concentration. This is a
static snapshot that cannot be translated into a dynamic map of metabolite traffic on
biochemical routes. A more complete understanding of biochemical pathways can be
obtained by using metabolic flux analysis. Metabolic fluxes are the in vivo velocities of
metabolic reactions. These include the rate of transformation of intermediates by enzymes
and of the transport of metabolites between compartments. In single cells or multicellular
organisms, metabolic fluxes are an emerging property as they depend on the systemic
organization and interplay of enzymes, carriers, and substrates in the environment.
Knowledge of metabolic fluxes is essential to unravel sites and mechanisms of metabolic
regulation, and thus augment our understanding on how metabolism is embedded in cellular
decisions. In diseased cells, information on fluxes paves the road for identification of
selective therapeutic targets.

Author Manuscript

The frequent questions related to metabolic fluxes are (i) discovery of the catabolic fate of a
given nutrient, (ii) discovery of the biosynthetic origin of a given intracellular compound,
(iii) targeted analysis of fluxes at a specific metabolic node or reaction, or (iv) determination
of cellular balances for redox (i.e., NADPH and NADH) and energy (ATP) carriers. In all
these quests, the method of choice is metabolic flux analysis with isotopic tracers, e.g., 13C
and 2H.
Basic principles of flux experiments—As any other reaction rate, metabolic fluxes
cannot be measured directly. In cell cultures, but not in vivo, it is possible to measure the
Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

consumption rate of nutrients and secretion of metabolic byproducts by monitoring the timedependent depletion or production, respectively, in spent medium. Intracellularly, however,
metabolite levels remain constant in a dynamic equilibrium between producing and
consuming reactions and don’t inform on molecular flow. Instead, intracellular fluxes can be
accessed by administering nutrients labeled with stable isotopes, typically 13C or 2H. Uptake
and enzymatic transformation of labeled substrates propagates heavy isotopes through the
metabolic network in a flux-dependent fashion. In some cases – but not always – the
resulting labeling pattern of metabolites can be used to infer from which nutrient it
originated or, if alternative pathways exist, through which enzymatic route.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Two fundamental designs exist for metabolic flux analysis studies: stationary and nonstationary experiments. In stationary experiments, labeling patterns are evaluated at the endpoint when they become invariant over time, i.e. an isotopic equilibrium was reached
(Zamboni et al., 2009). The main advantage of stationary experiments is that at isotopic
steady-state the measured labeling patterns are fully independent of metabolite levels. The
latter can be safely neglected in the calculation of fluxes from labeling data facilitating data
acquisition and interpretation. On the downside, stationary isotopic experiments are only
useful to resolve the relative contribution of different pathways to the synthesis of a common
derivative, but are not suited to quantify the flux in a simple linear pathway. Stationary
labeling experiments must last sufficiently long to attain isotopic stationarity. In peripheral
pathways, it can take days. During this time, conditions and fluxes must be constant. In cell
biology, stationary metabolic flux analysis is best suited to determine what nutrients
contributed to the biosynthesis of intracellular metabolites. For this purpose, single nutrients
are uniformly 13C-labeled while all other substrates are provided with natural labeling. At
isotopic steady state, the 13C-enrichment of each metabolite (i.e., its fractional labeling)
indicates what ratio originated from the labeled substrate.
Non-stationary labeling experiments, in contrast, focus on the kinetics of tracer propagation
before isotopic equilibrium (Wiechert and Nöh, 2013). This relaxes most limitations of
stationary experiments: labeling experiments can be as short as a few minutes and it
becomes possible to estimate fluxes within linear pathways. This increased power over
stationary analyses comes with extra costs. First, many more time-points, and thus more
samples and more instrument time, are necessary to assemble the data set. Second, data
analysis is substantially more complex. Third and most important, non-stationary labeling
transients depend both on metabolic fluxes and on intracellular metabolite concentration.
Therefore, the latter have to be measured by canonical quantitative metabolomics and
included in the interpretation.

Author Manuscript

Tracer choice—The labeling configuration of the tracer is a pivotal component of the
labeling experiment. As mentioned before, 100% uniformly 13C-labeled substrates are the
preferred for identifying their intracellular fate in any cellular system. In microorganisms,
the combination of uniformly 13C-labeled and unlabeled substrates has been largely used to
assess multiple fluxes in central metabolism with a single experiment. The mix between
labeled and unlabeled forms of the same substrate allows to resolve alternative pathways that
use different enzymes. The classical example is glucose catabolism through glycolysis or the
pentose-phosphate pathway (PPP). With 100% 13C-glucose, the two pathways are
Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

indistinguishable because they both produce completely 13C-labeled pyruvate. If 50%
uniformly 13C and 50% unlabeled glucose are mixed, catabolism through the transaldolase
and transketolase in the PPP will combine labeled and unlabeled carbon backbones and lead
to partly labeled pyruvate forms which differentiate from the either completely 13C-labeled
or unlabeled pyruvate molecules produced by glycolysis. In mammalian cells, however,
there are many more interfering pathways and nutrients that prevent resolving several fluxes
at once with generalist tracers. In contrast, positionally enriched tracers harboring stable
isotopes only at specific positions are used to resolve important reactions. This strategy is
particularly suited to assay decarboxylating enzymes if it is possible to label its substrate
such as all label is lost as 13CO2. This ad-hoc strategy is frequently used in the analysis of
the oxidative PPP, pyruvate dehydrogenase, or oxidative TCA cycle.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Measurement of labeling patterns—Non-radioactive isotopes are amenable with
instrumentation platforms such as mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance,
which provide powerful tools for determining the isotopic patterns of numerous metabolites
or macromolecules. The community is dominated by two types of instruments. Gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) is the most affordable technology and
perfectly suited to analyze isotopic patterns in amino and organic acids, sugars, and fatty
acids. GC/MS often adopts electron impact ionization, which intrinsically fragments
analytes and therefore provides additional information on the localization of the isotopic
label within the metabolite structure. In contrast, LC/MS uses a soft ionization technique
which preserve molecular ions. Compared to GC/MS, it delivers less positional information
but offers better coverage of endogenous metabolites. Therefore, LC/MS is preferred in nonstationary labeling experiments to monitor the isotopic transients in proximity of the
important reactions and also quantify the levels of metabolites required for non-stationary
data analysis.
Interpretation of labeling patterns—An ideally designed tracer experiment allows for
verification of the working hypothesis through direct observation of the labeling data or the
fractional labeling of a metabolite. Statistical significance is checked by simple univariate
testing. This is a practical strategy when searching for the origin of a given metabolite, and
the possible substrates or routes are characterized by different label content. It is also used in
combination with selective inhibition of alternative pathways (i.e., isoenzymes) by gene
knockout and knockdown or pharmacological inhibition, for which qualitative comparison
of the resulting labeling patterns is sufficient to assess their relative contribution. An
illustrative example is given by (Son et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

Unfortunately, it is not always feasible to design such an explicit labeling experiment.
Interpretation is complicated by the propagation and scrambling of tracer over the entire
network following carbon fluxes. A metabolic alteration occurring in the early steps of tracer
catabolism may affect the labeling patterns of all - close and distant - metabolites. The logic
consequence is that a difference in labeling patterns could have been caused by upstream
alterations in metabolism. An unbiased analysis of labeling patterns must consider the
potential effect of distant pathways. This is particularly challenging for metabolic cycles,
reversible reactions, and extensive compartmentalization that introduces numerous degrees

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

of freedom. Already in mid-sized systems such as central carbon metabolism, this task
exceeds human intuition and calls for formal analysis.

Author Manuscript

Mathematical inference of flux data from labeling patterns can tackle the problem from
essentially two complementary angles: globally or locally. In the global approach, all
cellular fluxes are sought simultaneously to find the set of flux solutions that best matches
measured labeling patterns. This approach builds on constraint-based modeling and
therefore requires possibly accurate measurement of the uptake and secretion rate of all
cellular substrates and products, respectively, to balance all species in the system.
Intracellular fluxes are fitted iteratively in a procedure that becomes computationally hard
with increasing number of model size and dimensions. Although powerful implementations
exist both for the stationary and non-stationary case (e.g. 13CFLUX2 (Weitzel et al., 2013)
and INCA (Young, 2014)), this approach quickly hits its limits when solving flux in central
carbon metabolism of mammalian cell lines grown with a variety of carbon sources. In
practice, precise flux estimations are obtained only by combining multiple labeling
experiments with different tracers and by fitting fluxes within amended models in which
reactions or compartments were neglected. Unless justified by independent data, e.g., on
protein expression, the model simplifications increase the risk of returning overly precise but
inaccurate flux values.

Author Manuscript

The local approach focuses only on a small part of the metabolic network, typically not
more than a few reactions sharing a common metabolite, and is geared towards estimating
local fluxes based solely on local data. In the stationary case, a local analysis only provides
relative fluxes, i.e., so-called flux ratios. Absolute flux rates can be estimated with
nonstationary labeling experiments and local metabolome concentrations. Compared to the
global approach, the local analysis doesn’t require any uptake and secretion measurements
and is computationally much simpler. There is no special software to recommend for local
flux analysis, but the principles are described in (Hörl et al., 2013; Yuan et al., 2008;
Zamboni et al., 2009). The local analysis is an efficient tactic to cope with complex flux
analysis problems, i.e., resolving fluxes in mammalian cells (Zamboni, 2011), by
decomposing the daunting challenge of resolving many fluxes at once in tractable tasks to be
solved with ad-hoc designs. This is best exemplified in the study by Fan et al. (Fan et al.,
2014), in which numerous experiments with 2H, 13C, and 14C tracers and local and
quantitative analyses were assembled into a cell-wide and yet accurate picture of NADPH
metabolism.

Author Manuscript

Frequent limitations and pitfalls—Calculability of fluxes in real systems depends on
multiple factors (Zamboni, 2011; Zamboni et al., 2009). Some factors are structural, e.g., the
mapping of atoms in metabolic reactions or the availability of mass spectrometry data. These
are known a priori and can thus be included in experimental design before the labeling
experiment is performed. Several factors are more fluid and difficult to capture in advance.
These include the mixing of label caused by fast reversible reactions, the uncertainty in
determining labeling patterns for metabolites that can exist in different cellular
compartments, the actual speed of label propagation far away from substrate entry, etc. The
extent by which these latter factors affect and jeopardize flux measurement depends on the
actual fluxes and metabolic state of the cell and can only be assessed a posteriori.
Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

Experience teaches us that biased flux analyses are mostly caused by two issues: overgeneralization and over-simplification. Generalization refers to the transfer of knowledge or
assumptions from a previous study to a new study. This is commonly done to avoid
measuring biomass composition or to claim that the effect of enzyme reversibility, or
compartmentalization, is negligible. Although these aspects were carefully ascertained in the
previous study, it is risky to generalize across different cell types, different environments, or
different proliferation rates. Simplification of the model was discussed before as a habit to
enable flux calculation in underdetermined systems. It is common practice to disregard
compartmentalization of enzymes and intermediates or reaction/pathways that are meant to
have only a secondary role. It must be stressed that data are only good to prove models
wrong. Hence, a good fit of measurements to a given model are not proof that the underlying
fluxes reflect reality unless all plausible models were exhaustively tested.

Author Manuscript

Experience has also thought us that a purist approach without some simplifications and
generalization drastically prevents the generation of testable hypotheses on metabolic fluxes.
Finding the right equilibrium between calculation and assumptions depends on critical
assessment. Results should be openly challenged by the scientist. Positive and negative
controls should be included in the analysis as for any other analytical technique.

Biological Lessons from Metabolite Profiling
Alan Saghatelian

Author Manuscript

How do we detect and quantify metabolites?—There are many ways to detect and
quantify metabolite levels or to measure labeling patterns in compounds. Early methods to
measure metabolites relied on thin layer chromatography (TLC) of abundant compounds or
radiolabeling followed by TLC for less abundant compounds. The emergence of gas
chromatography and GC/MS proved incredibly important to improving our understanding of
cellular metabolism. Still, today, GC/MS is an important and widely used method for
detecting metabolites, as well as a technology often used for performing metabolic flux
analysis as described by Nicola Zamboni above. Indeed, GC/MS was used in much of the
early metabolomics work, which was done in plants (Weckwerth et al., 2004). Plants were
an excellent choice because the combination of metabolomics and genetics enabled the
metabolic characterization of many genes. Weckwerth, Fiehn and colleagues used GC/MSbased metabolomics of potatoes to identify metabolic functions of genes with silent
phenotypes, demonstrating the power of metabolomics in gene characterization (Weckwerth
et al., 2004).

Author Manuscript

Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has also been used for metabolomics,
provides rapid metabolome analysis, and can sometimes be used to resolve the location of
stable isotopes within a molecular structure.(Cheng et al., 2011) In an interesting
demonstration of NMR metabolomics, Dumas, et. al. described changes in choline
metabolism that are linked to fatty liver through measurements of plasma and urine
metabolites (Dumas et al., 2006).
The most popular method for metabolomics, however, has been mass spectrometry-based
metabolomics. Shotgun metabolomics refers to methods that infuse extracted metabolome

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

samples without any chromatography (Adamovich et al., 2014; Han and Gross, 2005). Like
NMR, these methods are extremely fast and enable rapid detection and quantitation of
metabolites. Adamovich and co-workers utilized shotgun lipidomics to quantify levels of
acyl glycerols, sphingolipids, and phospholipids in mice that lack per1 and per2, two key
circadian rhythm genes, and observed the regulation of trigylceride levels by the circadian
clock (Adamovich et al., 2014).

Author Manuscript

Greater coverage of the metabolome is achieved by combining chromatography with mass
spectrometry. Different types of chromatography have been successfully employed for
greater metabolome coverage, including the aforementioned GC, liquid chromatography,
and capillary electrophoresis (CE) (Patti, 2011; Soga et al., 2003). The choice of
chromatography methods depends on metabolites of interest. GC/MS has been used
extensively, and successfully, to analyze the metabolome and flux distributions, but
metabolites must be chemically derivatized so they are volatile (Weckwerth et al., 2004).
Larger molecules or molecules that are heat labile are therefore not compatible with GC.
Capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (CE-MS) is excellent for charged molecules
such as small organic acids, amino acids, and charged (phosphorylated) sugars (Soga et al.,
2003). Lastly, of the methods currently in use, LC/MS is the most widely used technique for
metabolomics because it provides the greatest coverage of the metabolome as discussed by
Gary Patti in preceding sections (Want et al., 2007).

Author Manuscript

The first step in any metabolomics or stable-isotope tracer experiment is the isolation of the
metabolites from cells or tissues. The extraction method can vary depending on the
metabolites of interest, with robust protocols for hydrophilic (Bennett et al., 2008) and
hydrophobic metabolites having been reported (Inloes et al., 2014). Isolated metabolites are
then analyzed by LC/MS. Many types of LC columns have been developed for hydrophilic
and hydrophobic analytes. In a metabolomic profiling experiment, the mass spectrometer is
set to scan a large mass range (i.e. 75–1500 m/z) such that any ionizable metabolite of
sufficient concentration can be detected and quantified. By scanning a broad mass range,
metabolomic profiling experiments are less sensitive and can miss lower abundant
metabolites. Therefore, targeted methods have been developed for a number of important
metabolites, such as oxysterols (McDonald et al., 2012), which provide the sensitivity to
analyze the entire metabolite family, but not the entire metabolome. Similarly targeted
methods are often used in metabolic flux analysis (Yuan et al., 2008).

Author Manuscript

In addition to using stable isotopes for flux analysis, stable isotope standards are also used to
validate changing metabolite levels identified during a metabolomics or lipidomics
experiment. The use of stable isotope labeled standards (2H, 13C or 15N) for absolute
quantitation is referred to as isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS) (Bennett et al.,
2008). Stable isotope standards are added into the sample during extraction and the ratio of
these molecules to the endogenous metabolite enables absolute quantitation of the
endogenous metabolite. These experiments are performed in combination with targeted
LC/MS, which provides improved signal-to-noise and sensitivity, resulting in a more
accurate quantitation. An analogy in genomics is the use of quantitative PCR to validate the
results from an RNA-Seq experiment. Validation by IDMS provides the highest confidence

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

in fold changes that were observed during the profiling experiment and also confirms the
structural assignment.

Author Manuscript

Biological lessons from metabolomics and metabolic flux analysis—As
metabolomics and metabolic flux experiments have become more prevalent, their use in
biology and biomedical research has expanded and led to fundamental insights in several
fields. The cell biologists Atilla-Gokcumen, and colleagues, for example, combined
lipidomics with cell biology to identify the role of lipids, and lipid modifying enzymes, in
cytokinesis, a physical process in cell division that results in the splitting of the cytoplasm
into newly divided cells (Atilla-Gokcumen et al., 2014). In this study, the group utilized
untargeted lipidomics to identify several lipids that were changing (accumulating) during
cytokinesis and/or in the midbody, a transient structure that appears during the end of
cytokinesis and is required for the completion of cell division. Knockdown of the enzymes
that metabolize key midbody lipids affected cytokinesis, revealing new metabolic regulators
of this fundamental process.

Author Manuscript

A creative use of metabolomics has also revealed new RNA modifications. Chen, Kowtoniuk
and co-workers began by purifying cellular RNAs to remove small molecules (Chen et al.,
2009). These RNAs are then digested with nuclease P1, which breaks down the RNAs into
nucleosides monophosphates, which can then be analyzed using LC/MS-based
metabolomics. Comparison of digested RNA to a sample treated with an inactive nuclease
P1 (heat denatured) provided the first evidence for an NAD-linked RNA in E.coli and
S.venezuelae. The high levels of this modification (3000 copies/cell) suggested that NADmodified RNA served a cellular function. Indeed, subsequent work by Cahová, et. al.
demonstrated that 5’-NAD serves as a bacterial RNA cap to regulate RNA degradation
(Cahova et al., 2014). This example highlights the power of metabolomics to make new
discoveries in well-studied systems such as E.coli, which bodes well for the continued
impact of metabolomics in biological and biomedical research.

Author Manuscript

Cancer biologists have used metabolomics and metabolic flux analysis to better understand
the contribution of aerobic glycolysis, the “Warburg effect”, to the cancer phenotype (Lunt
and Vander Heiden, 2011). Initially, Warburg hypothesized that increased glycolysis was
associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, but newer studies have demonstrated that cancercausing genes drive the transition to increased glycolytic rates (Ramanathan et al., 2005).
More recently, Loscale, et. al. used metabolic flux analysis to understand glucose utilization
in cancer cells (Locasale et al., 2011). They observed that a substantial fraction of glucose
carbon in cancer cells is diverted into amino acid metabolism (serine and glycine) through
the overexpression of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). Moreover, a reduction of
PHGDG expression impaired proliferation, indicating the importance of this pathway in
driving cell growth. Presumably, increased amino acid production is needed to support
protein translation. This is one of several examples that indicate a role for aerobic glycolysis
in producing biomass for cellular proliferation (Lunt et al., 2015).
Metabolomics has also been used to identify the functions of genes associated with cancer.
Mutations in the isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1), for example, had been linked with
human brain cancer, but the biochemical role of the mutant IDH1 was unclear. The classical

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

function of IDH1 is to convert isocitrate to alpha-ketoglutarate, but cancer-associated IDH1
mutations confer a new activity onto this enzyme. Untargeted metabolomics of mutant
IDH1Arg132His by Dang and colleagues revealed that this mutant enzyme is able to convert
alpha-ketoglutarate into 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG) (Dang et al., 2009). 2-HG was referred
to as an oncometabolite since elevation of 2-HG levels has been shown to increase the risk
of brain tumors. Inhibitors of mutant IDH1 that prevent 2-HG production slow tumor growth
(Rohle et al., 2013), demonstrating the value of these metabolomics studies in revealing a
new therapeutic target.

Author Manuscript

The combination of genetics, metabolomics and chemical biology has also proven useful in
studying mutations in DDHD2, a poorly characterized enzyme linked to hereditary spastic
paraplegia (HSP). Inoles and colleagues created a mouse model that lacked DDHD2
(DDHD2−/− mice) to determine the physiological consequences of loss of DDHD2 activity,
and used this model to better understand the biochemical function of this enzyme using
lipidomics (Inloes et al., 2014). DDHD2−/− mice showed age-related dysfunction in motor
function and cognitive function. Lipidomic comparison of DDHD2−/− to WT mice revealed
a marked accumulation of tryglycerides in the brains of DDHD2−/− mice, which was
accompanied by lipid droplet accumulation. DDHD2 had been reported to have
phospholipase activity in vitro (Higgs et al., 1998), but the analysis of the DDHD2−/− mice
clearly showed that this enzyme is a brain triglyceride hydrolase with no detectable impact
on phospholipids. This DDHD2 analysis underscores the importance of characterizing
enzymes in their native environments where the contributions of the entire proteome can be
taken into account. Furthermore, the correct characterization of the metabolic defects
associated with DDHD2−/− provides insights that can be utilized in the eventual
development of therapeutics to treat HSP.

Author Manuscript

In closing, metabolomics and metabolic flux analysis are providing new insights into
numerous biological problems. In addition to the aforementioned studies, additional work
has utilized metabolomics to study metabolic disease, such as metabolic risk factors for type
2 diabetes (Rhee et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2013) and the identification of metabolically
beneficial lipids (Cao et al., 2008; Oh et al., 2010), including novel lipids (Yore et al., 2014).
Metabolomics is also being used by immunologists and microbiologists to study the impact
of the gut microbiome on physiology (Ridaura et al., 2013). As metabolomics and metabolic
flux analysis continues to be utilized in the biological and biomedical sciences, we will learn
more about the role of metabolism in regulating important biological processes, and in the
case of disease biology these studies have the potential to reveal new therapeutic
opportunities (Rohle et al., 2013).

Author Manuscript

References
Adamovich Y, Rousso-Noori L, Zwighaft Z, Neufeld-Cohen A, Golik M, Kraut-Cohen J, Wang M,
Han X, Asher G. Circadian clocks and feeding time regulate the oscillations and levels of hepatic
triglycerides. Cell metabolism. 2014; 19:319–330. [PubMed: 24506873]
Atilla-Gokcumen GE, Muro E, Relat-Goberna J, Sasse S, Bedigian A, Coughlin ML, Garcia-Manyes
S, Eggert US. Dividing cells regulate their lipid composition and localization. Cell. 2014; 156:428–
439. [PubMed: 24462247]

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

Bennett BD, Yuan J, Kimball EH, Rabinowitz JD. Absolute quantitation of intracellular metabolite
concentrations by an isotope ratio-based approach. Nat Protoc. 2008; 3:1299–1311. [PubMed:
18714298]
Benton HP, Ivanisevic J, Mahieu NG, Kurczy ME, Johnson CH, Franco L, Rinehart D, Valentine E,
Gowda H, Ubhi BK, et al. An autonomous metabolomic workflow for untargeted profiling. Anal
Chem. 2014
Cahova H, Winz ML, Hofer K, Nubel G, Jaschke A. NAD captureSeq indicates NAD as a bacterial cap
for a subset of regulatory RNAs. Nature. 2014
Cao H, Gerhold K, Mayers JR, Wiest MM, Watkins SM, Hotamisligil GS. Identification of a lipokine,
a lipid hormone linking adipose tissue to systemic metabolism. Cell. 2008; 134:933–944. [PubMed:
18805087]
Chain EB. LANDMARKS AND PERSPECTIVES IN BIOCHEMICAL RESEARCH. Br Med J.
1965; 1:209–220. [PubMed: 14228153]
CONCL. Chen YG, Kowtoniuk WE, Agarwal I, Shen Y, Liu DR. LC/MS analysis of cellular RNA
reveals NAD-linked RNA. Nature chemical biology. 2009; 5:879–881. [PubMed: 19820715]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Cheng T, Sudderth J, Yang C, Mullen AR, Jin ES, Mates JM, DeBerardinis RJ. Pyruvate carboxylase is
required for glutamine-independent growth of tumor cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;
108:8674–8679. [PubMed: 21555572]
Dang L, White DW, Gross S, Bennett BD, Bittinger MA, Driggers EM, Fantin VR, Jang HG, Jin S,
Keenan MC, et al. Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce 2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature. 2009;
462:739–744. [PubMed: 19935646]
Dumas ME, Barton RH, Toye A, Cloarec O, Blancher C, Rothwell A, Fearnside J, Tatoud R, Blanc V,
Lindon JC, et al. Metabolic profiling reveals a contribution of gut microbiota to fatty liver
phenotype in insulin-resistant mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America. 2006; 103:12511–12516. [PubMed: 16895997]
Fan J, Ye J, Kamphorst JJ, Shlomi T, Thompson CB, Rabinowitz JD. Quantitative flux analysis reveals
folate-dependent NADPH production. Nature. 2014; 510:298–302. [PubMed: 24805240]
Han X, Gross RW. Shotgun lipidomics: electrospray ionization mass spectrometric analysis and
quantitation of cellular lipidomes directly from crude extracts of biological samples. Mass
spectrometry reviews. 2005; 24:367–412. [PubMed: 15389848]
Higgs HN, Han MH, Johnson GE, Glomset JA. Cloning of a phosphatidic acid-preferring
phospholipase A1 from bovine testis. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 1998; 273:5468–5477.
[PubMed: 9488669]
Horai H, Arita M, Kanaya S, Nihei Y, Ikeda T, Suwa K, Ojima Y, Tanaka K, Tanaka S, Aoshima K, et
al. MassBank: a public repository for sharing mass spectral data for life sciences. J Mass
Spectrom. 2010; 45:703–714. [PubMed: 20623627]
Hörl M, Schnidder J, Sauer U, Zamboni N. Non-stationary 13C-metabolic flux ratio analysis.
Biotechnol Bioeng. 2013; 110:3164–3176. [PubMed: 23860906]
Inloes JM, Hsu KL, Dix MM, Viader A, Masuda K, Takei T, Wood MR, Cravatt BF. The hereditary
spastic paraplegia-related enzyme DDHD2 is a principal brain triglyceride lipase. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2014; 111:14924–14929.
[PubMed: 25267624]
Kalisiak J, Trauger SA, Kalisiak E, Morita H, Fokin VV, Adams MW, Sharpless KB, Siuzdak G.
Identification of a new endogenous metabolite and the characterization of its protein interactions
through an immobilization approach. J Am Chem Soc. 2009; 131:378–386. [PubMed: 19055353]
Kuhl C, Tautenhahn R, Bottcher C, Larson TR, Neumann S. CAMERA: An Integrated Strategy for
Compound Spectra Extraction and Annotation of Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry
Data Sets. Anal Chem. 2012; 84:283–289. [PubMed: 22111785]
Locasale JW, Grassian AR, Melman T, Lyssiotis CA, Mattaini KR, Bass AJ, Heffron G, Metallo CM,
Muranen T, Sharfi H, et al. Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase diverts glycolytic flux and
contributes to oncogenesis. Nature genetics. 2011; 43:869–874. [PubMed: 21804546]
Lunt SY, Muralidhar V, Hosios AM, Israelsen WJ, Gui DY, Newhouse L, Ogrodzinski M, Hecht V, Xu
K, Acevedo PN, et al. Pyruvate kinase isoform expression alters nucleotide synthesis to impact cell
proliferation. Molecular cell. 2015; 57:95–107. [PubMed: 25482511]
Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 14

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Lunt SY, Vander Heiden MG. Aerobic glycolysis: meeting the metabolic requirements of cell
proliferation. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2011; 27:441–464. [PubMed: 21985671]
Mahieu NG, Huang X, Chen YJ, Patti GJ. Credentialed Features: A Platform to Benchmark and
Optimize Untargeted Metabolomic Methods. Anal Chem. 2014
Mathe EA, Patterson AD, Haznadar M, Manna SK, Krausz KW, Bowman ED, Shields PG, Idle JR,
Smith PB, Anami K, et al. Noninvasive urinary metabolomic profiling identifies diagnostic and
prognostic markers in lung cancer. Cancer Res. 2014; 74:3259–3270. [PubMed: 24736543]
McDonald JG, Smith DD, Stiles AR, Russell DW. A comprehensive method for extraction and
quantitative analysis of sterols and secosteroids from human plasma. Journal of lipid research.
2012; 53:1399–1409. [PubMed: 22517925]
McKnight SL. On Getting There from Here. Science. 2010; 330:1338–1339. [PubMed: 21127243]
Nicholson, SDaDE. An Introduction to Metabolic Pathways. Oxford and Edinburgh: Blackwell
Scientific Publications; 1970.
Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M. KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999; 27:29–34. [PubMed: 9847135]
Oh DY, Talukdar S, Bae EJ, Imamura T, Morinaga H, Fan W, Li P, Lu WJ, Watkins SM, Olefsky JM.
GPR120 is an omega-3 fatty acid receptor mediating potent anti-inflammatory and insulinsensitizing effects. Cell. 2010; 142:687–698. [PubMed: 20813258]
Patti GJ. Separation strategies for untargeted metabolomics. J Sep Sci. 2011; 34:3460–3469. [PubMed:
21972197]
Patti GJ, Yanes O, Shriver LP, Courade JP, Tautenhahn R, Manchester M, Siuzdak G. Metabolomics
implicates altered sphingolipids in chronic pain of neuropathic origin. Nat Chem Biol. 2012a;
8:232–234. [PubMed: 22267119]
Patti GJ, Yanes O, Siuzdak G. Innovation: Metabolomics: the apogee of the omics trilogy. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol. 2012b; 13:263–269. [PubMed: 22436749]
Ramanathan A, Wang C, Schreiber SL. Perturbational profiling of a cell-line model of tumorigenesis
by using metabolic measurements. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America. 2005; 102:5992–5997. [PubMed: 15840712]
Rhee EP, Cheng S, Larson MG, Walford GA, Lewis GD, McCabe E, Yang E, Farrell L, Fox CS,
O'Donnell CJ, et al. Lipid profiling identifies a triacylglycerol signature of insulin resistance and
improves diabetes prediction in humans. The Journal of clinical investigation. 2011; 121:1402–
1411. [PubMed: 21403394]
Ridaura VK, Faith JJ, Rey FE, Cheng J, Duncan AE, Kau AL, Griffin NW, Lombard V, Henrissat B,
Bain JR, et al. Gut microbiota from twins discordant for obesity modulate metabolism in mice.
Science. 2013; 341:1241214. [PubMed: 24009397]
Rohle D, Popovici-Muller J, Palaskas N, Turcan S, Grommes C, Campos C, Tsoi J, Clark O, Oldrini B,
Komisopoulou E. An inhibitor of mutant IDH1 delays growth and promotes differentiation of
glioma cells. Science. 2013; 340:626–630. [PubMed: 23558169]
Soga T, Ohashi Y, Ueno Y, Naraoka H, Tomita M, Nishioka T. Quantitative metabolome analysis using
capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry. Journal of proteome research. 2003; 2:488–494.
[PubMed: 14582645]
Son J, Lyssiotis CA, Ying H, Wang X, Hua S, Ligorio M, Perera RM, Ferrone CR, Mullarky E, ShyhChang N, et al. Glutamine supports pancreatic cancer growth through a KRAS-regulated metabolic
pathway. Nature. 2013; 496:101–105. [PubMed: 23535601]
Stupp GS, Clendinen CS, Ajredini R, Szewc MA, Garrett T, Menger RF, Yost RA, Beecher C, Edison
AS. Isotopic ratio outlier analysis global metabolomics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Anal Chem.
2013; 85:11858–11865. [PubMed: 24274725]
Tautenhahn R, Cho K, Uritboonthai W, Zhu Z, Patti GJ, Siuzdak G. An accelerated workflow for
untargeted metabolomics using the METLIN database. Nat Biotechnol. 2012a; 30:826–828.
[PubMed: 22965049]
Tautenhahn R, Patti GJ, Rinehart D, Siuzdak G. XCMS Online: A Web-Based Platform to Process
Untargeted Metabolomic Data. Anal Chem. 2012b; 84:5035–5039. [PubMed: 22533540]

Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

Zamboni et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Thiele I, Swainston N, Fleming RM, Hoppe A, Sahoo S, Aurich MK, Haraldsdottir H, Mo ML,
Rolfsson O, Stobbe MD, et al. A community-driven global reconstruction of human metabolism.
Nat Biotechnol. 2013; 31:419–425. [PubMed: 23455439]
Wang TJ, Ngo D, Psychogios N, Dejam A, Larson MG, Vasan RS, Ghorbani A, O'Sullivan J, Cheng S,
Rhee EP, et al. 2-Aminoadipic acid is a biomarker for diabetes risk. The Journal of clinical
investigation. 2013; 123:4309–4317. [PubMed: 24091325]
Want EJ, Nordstrom A, Morita H, Siuzdak G. From exogenous to endogenous: the inevitable imprint
of mass spectrometry in metabolomics. J Proteome Res. 2007; 6:459–468. [PubMed: 17269703]
Weckwerth W, Loureiro ME, Wenzel K, Fiehn O. Differential metabolic networks unravel the effects
of silent plant phenotypes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America. 2004; 101:7809–7814. [PubMed: 15136733]
Weitzel M, Noh K, Dalman T, Niedenfuhr S, Stute B, Wiechert W. 13CFLUX2--high-performance
software suite for (13)C-metabolic flux analysis. Bioinformatics. 2013; 29:143–145. [PubMed:
23110970]
Wiechert W, Nöh K. Isotopically non-stationary metabolic flux analysis: complex yet highly
informative. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2013; 24:979–986. [PubMed: 23623747]
Wishart DS, Knox C, Guo AC, Eisner R, Young N, Gautam B, Hau DD, Psychogios N, Dong E,
Bouatra S, et al. HMDB: a knowledgebase for the human metabolome. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009;
37:D603–610. [PubMed: 18953024]
Yore MM, Syed I, Moraes-Vieira PM, Zhang T, Herman MA, Homan EA, Patel RT, Lee J, Chen S,
Peroni OD, et al. Discovery of a class of endogenous mammalian lipids with antidiabetic and antiinflammatory effects. Cell. 2014; 159:318–332. [PubMed: 25303528]
Young JD. INCA: a computational platform for isotopically non-stationary metabolic flux analysis.
Bioinformatics. 2014; 30:1333–1335. [PubMed: 24413674]
Yuan J, Bennett BD, Rabinowitz JD. Kinetic flux profiling for quantitation of cellular metabolic fluxes.
Nat Protoc. 2008; 3:1328–1340. [PubMed: 18714301]
Zamboni N. 13C metabolic flux analysis in complex systems. Curr Opin Biotechnol. 2011; 22:103–
108. [PubMed: 20833526]
Zamboni N, Fendt SM, Rühl M, Sauer U. 13C-based metabolic flux analysis. Nat Protoc . 2009;
4:878–892. [PubMed: 19478804]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Mol Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 May 21.

