2
Mass Spectrometry
Alan L. Rockwood, Mark M. Kushnir, and Nigel J. Clarke*

ABSTRACT
Background
Mass spectrometry is a powerful analytical technique used
to identify and quantify analytes using the mass-to-charge
ratio (m/z) of ions generated from a sample. It is useful for the
analysis of a wide range of clinically relevant analytes, including
small molecules, proteins, and peptides. When mass spectrometry is coupled with either gas or liquid chromatographs,
the resultant analyzers have expanded analytical capabilities
with widespread clinical applications, including quantitation
of analytes from myriad body tissues and ﬂuids. In addition,
because of its ability to identify and quantify proteins, mass
spectrometry is widely used in the ﬁeld of proteomics.
Content
This chapter describes the basic concepts and deﬁnitions of
mass spectrometry. Techniques based on mass spectrometry
require an ionization step wherein an ion is produced from
neutral atoms or molecules. Electron impact and chemical

Mass spectrometry (MS) is a powerful qualitative and
quantitative analytical technique that is used to identify and
quantify a wide range of clinically relevant analytes. When
coupled with gas or liquid chromatographs, mass spectrometers allow expansion of analytical capabilities to a variety of
clinical applications. In addition, because of its ability to
identify and quantify proteins, MS is a key analytical tool in
the ﬁeld of proteomics.
We begin this chapter with a discussion of the basic
concepts and deﬁnitions of MS, followed by discussions of
MS instrumentation and clinical applications, and we end
the chapter with a discussion of logistic, operational, and
quality issues. In this chapter it is impossible to cover all
concepts in a ﬁeld as vast as MS, even if focus is limited to
clinical applications. The Clinical and Laboratory Standards
Institute (CLSI) has published recommendations on clinical
*The authors gratefully acknowledge the original contributions by
Thomas M. Annesley, Nicholas E. Sherman, and Larry D. Bowers
on which portions of this chapter are based. We also wish to
acknowledge technical assistance by Leita Rogers, Jacquelyn
McCowen-Rose, and Martha Fowles and helpful suggestions from
N. Leigh Anderson, Julianne C. Botelho, Pierre Chaurand, David
K. Crockett, Ulrich Eigner, Steven A. Hofstadler, Andrew N. Hoofnagle, Gary H. Kruppa, Donald Mason, Michael Morris, Maria M.
Ospina, and Hubert W. Vesper.

ionization (CI) are often used in gas chromatographyemass
spectrometry. In liquid chromatographyemass spectrometry, electrospray ionization (ESI) and atmospheric pressure
CI are the most commonly used techniques. In microbiology, a desorption/ionization technique termed MALDI
(matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization) is employed.
Each of these ionization techniques is described in detail, and
advantages of the techniques are highlighted. Once molecules
are ionized, resultant ions are analyzed using either beam type
analyzers (eg, quadrupole, or time-of-ﬂight [TOF]) or trapping mass analyzers (eg, ion trap). Mass analyzers also can be
combined to form tandem mass spectrometers, which allow
further expending capabilities of the technique. Clinical applications of mass spectrometry are provided to illustrate the
role of this technique in the analysis of clinically relevant
analytes.

MS that can serve as a good next step to study this topic
and another gateway into the extensive literature on this
topic.1,2

BASIC CONCEPTS AND DEFINITIONS
MS is the branch of physical chemistry (often also considered
a branch of analytical chemistry) that deals with all aspects of
instrumentation and the applications of this technique.
Molecular mass (sometimes referred to as molecular weight)
is measured in uniﬁed atomic mass units (u), also known as
the dalton (Da), equal to 1/12 of the atomic mass of the
most abundant isotope of a carbon atom in its lowest energy
state, deﬁned as 12 Da. Although the term atomic mass unit
(amu) has been regarded as equivalent to the Da, it is only
approximately equal to the dalton and now is considered an
obsolete unit; its use to refer to the dalton is strongly
discouraged.
Most MS data are presented in units of mass-to-charge
ratio, or m/z, where m is the molecular weight of the ion
(in daltons) and z is the number of charges present on the
measured molecule. For small molecules (<1000 Da) there
is typically only a single charge and therefore the m/z value
is the same as the mass of the molecular ion. However,
when larger molecules such as proteins or peptides are

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816063-3.00002-5
Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

33

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry
If the ionization of the analyte in the source produces little
fragmentation, it is referred to as being soft, and the most
abundant peak in the mass spectrum (the base peak) is often
the molecular ion. If the ion source produces extensive
fragmentation it is referred to as hard ionization, and the
base peak in the resulting spectra may be one of the fragment
ions. By convention, the base peak in a mass spectrum is
assigned a relative abundance value of 100%.
Fragment ions that are formed in a separate dissociation
cell (also known as the collision cell) inside a tandem mass
spectrometer are known as product ions, and the technique is
called tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Ions that give
rise to product ions are known as precursor ions. A tandem
mass spectrometer consists of two mass spectrometers
operated in sequence (MS/MS in space) or a single mass
spectrometer capable of sequential fragmentation and
measurement of ions within a single region of space (MS/
MS in time). Most commonly in the clinical diagnostic
methods, precursor ions are dissociated into product ions
between the two stages of m/z analysis (MS/MS in space).
A mass spectrum is represented by the relative abundance
of each ion plotted as a function of m/z (Fig. 2.1). As
mentioned earlier, for small molecules, usually each ion has
100
204
80
Relative abundance

measured, they typically carry multiple ionic charges and
therefore the z value is an integer greater than 1. In these cases
the m/z value will be a fraction of the mass of the ion.
All MS techniques require an initial ionization step in
which an ion is produced from a neutral atom or molecule.
Ions are formed in the ion source of the mass spectrometer.
The development of versatile ionization techniques has
allowed MS to become the excellent broad-spectrum
analytical technique it is today; this was highlighted when,
in 2002, John Fenn and Koichi Tanaka shared the Nobel Prize
for their development of electrospray3,4 and laser desorption5-7 ionization, respectively. In the ion sources most
commonly used with MS instruments in clinical chemistry,
ionization in positive ion mode results from the addition of
one (or more) protons to the basic sites on the molecule.
This is referred to as protonation and leads to formation of
a positively charged ion. The mass of the ion is greater than
the mass of the uncharged neutral molecule by the added
mass of one proton, approximately 1 Da, or multiples of a
single proton mass (in case of multiply charged ions).
Negatively charged ions (negative ion mode of MS operation)
can be generated by the loss of a proton or addition of a
negatively charged moiety (such as a hydroxyl group).
Ions may also be produced by removal of one or more
electrons from a molecule using electron ionization (EI).
This ionization method is historically the dominant
ionization method used in MS (most commonly in gas
chromatographyemass spectrometry [GC-MS] instruments)
and is still used in some applications, but other ionization
methods are now more frequently used in clinical laboratories. The removal of one electron produces a positively
charged ion and reduces the mass by approximately 5 
104 Da relative to the neutral molecule from which the ion
is produced. This relatively small mass shift is often considered to be negligible and therefore ignored. More rarely,
ions may be produced by addition of one electron to a molecule, producing a negative ion with mass approximately 5 
104 Da greater than the neutral molecule from which the
ion is produced. This small mass increment is also often
considered to be negligible relative to the neutral molecule.
Ions formed in the ion source are separated according to
m/z values in a mass analyzer. The term mass analyzer is in
common use, although more correctly it would be termed
an m/z analyzer given the fact that mass spectrometers separate ions according to m/z, not mass. This chapter will use the
terms mass analyzer and m/z analyzer interchangeably.
While in a mass analyzer, ions may undergo fragmentation,
whereby energy is imparted into the ionized analyte, causing
internal bonds to break and resulting in the production
of multiple independent unconnected chemical species.
Fragmentation can occur within different regions of the mass
spectrometer and can occur due to the deliberate action of the
operator or excessive energy imparted into the parent molecule
as it is being ionized or passes through the vacuum region of
the mass analyzer. An unfragmented ion of the intact molecule
is referred to as the molecular ion, whereas the species that occur
on fragmentation of the molecular ion are called the fragment
ions. There is a certain ambiguity in the term molecular ion
because in many cases the structure of the ion is not identical
to the structure of the original neutral molecule (eg, differing
by the addition or removal of one or more protons, so the
term molecular ion must be thought of in terms of an unfragmented ion whose structure is closely related to, but not necessarily identical to, the original uncharged molecule.

60

40

160

118
20

42

91

65

0
60

80

A

100 120 140
Mass/charge

160

180

200

100
308
80
Relative abundance

34

60

40

20
44

91

195

118
159

262
236

0
50

B

100

200
150
Mass/charge

250

300

FIGURE 2.1 Mass spectrum of the pentaﬂuoropropionyl
(A) and carbethoxyhexaﬂuorobutyryl (B) derivatives of
methamphetamine.

D-

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
a single charge (z ¼ 1); thus the m/z ratio is equal to the mass of
the ion and is approximately 1 Da greater than the neutral molecule from which the ion is formed. However, in some cases, the
charge may be represented by an integer number greater than 1,
in which case the m/z ratio is not equal to the mass of the ion,
but rather is some fraction of the mass of the ion.
An ion may be positively charged, in which case the
number of electrons in the ion is less than the sum of the
number of protons in all nuclei of the ion, or negatively
charged, in which case the number of electrons is greater
than the number of protons. By convention, in MS z is taken
as an absolute value. For example, z ¼ 1 for both Naþ and Cl.
Chemical interferences as well as higher background noise
are more common for analytes with m/z 200 to 500 than for
m/z less than 200 and m/z greater than 500. Monitoring ions
with higher m/z often results in lower limits of detection
because of the lower background noise and lower occurrence
of isomers and isobars of the targeted molecules (ie, superior
signal to noise).
A peak in a mass spectrum can be characterized by its
resolution [(m/z)/(Dm/z)], where Dm/z is the width of the
mass spectral peak. This parameter characterizes the ability
of a mass spectrometer to separate nearby masses from
each other. Typically the width of the peak is measured at
50% of the height of the peak and is referred to as the full
width half height (FWHH) or full width half maximum
(FWHM) resolution. A second frequently encountered
deﬁnition for resolution is 10% valley. It deﬁnes Dm/z as
the distance between two peaks of equal intensity, spaced so
that the valley between the peaks is 10% of the peak height
(Fig. 2.2). This is a more conservative deﬁnition than FWHM
because for a given quoted resolution (eg, 2000) the peaks are
narrower under the 10% valley deﬁnition, hence better separated. High resolution is a desirable property in MS because it
can help reduce interferences from nearby peaks in the mass
spectrum, thereby allowing it to achieve a higher speciﬁcity.
By setting the relative abundance of the base peak to 100%
and therefore using the relative, rather than absolute,
abundance of each ion fragment, instrument-dependent
variability is minimized and the mass spectrum can be
compared with mass spectra obtained on other instruments.
Because fragmentation at speciﬁc bonds depends on their
chemical nature and strength of the bonds, the mass
spectrum can be interpreted in terms of the molecular

1.2
(Δm/z)10% valley

Relative abundance

1.0
0.8

10% valley

0.6
(Δm/z)FWHM

0.4
0.2
0.0
999

1000

1001

1002

m/z

FIGURE 2.2 Parameters used to deﬁne resolution in mass
spectrometry. FWHM, Full width half maximum.

35

structure of the analyte. In some cases, the chemical structure
of the analyte can be deduced or at least reconciled with features found in the mass spectrum. Computer-based libraries
of mass spectra are also available to assist in identiﬁcation of
the analyte(s) based on fragmentation pattern. In some
applications, the mass spectrum of an analyte may be matched
against mass spectra in a database, thereby identifying the analyte by its mass spectral ﬁngerprint. In general, an unknown is
considered to be identiﬁed if the relative abundances of three
or four ion fragments agree within 20% of those from a
reference compound and the relative abundances of the fragments, monoisotopic and isotopic ions of the molecular ion
are in agreement with the relative abundances of the reference
mass spectrum.
When interfaced to a liquid or gas chromatograph, the mass
spectrometer functions as a powerful detector, providing
structural information in real time on individual analytes as
they elute from a chromatographic column. Depending on
the operating characteristics of the mass spectrometer and
the chromatographic peak width, multiple mass spectral scans
can be acquired across the peak. The data also can be displayed
as a function of time to yield a total ion chromatogram in which
at each time point in the chromatogram the abundances of all
ions in a mass spectrum are summed to constitute a single point
in the ion chromatogram, regardless of m/z.
The mass spectrometer can be considered to be close to a
universal detector because molecules of many identities may
be ionized and then detected in a mass spectrometer. Furthermore there are different MS operation modes and different types
of fragmentation that can be applied to provide different types
of data, giving more information about the measured compound(s). Finally, the instrument data system can analyze and
display the collected data in various manners, allowing the operator to selectively extract information from the acquired data.
For example, it is possible to display chromatograms of
only preselected ions acquired during data acquisitiondthat
is, representing data from only part of the mass spectrum.
The resultant display of data is called an extracted ion
chromatogram, displaying signal intensity plotted as a function
of time; peak heights or peak areas can be integrated for use in
quantitative analysis. Use of the extracted ion chromatogram
allows selecting data corresponding to the analyte of interest,
as identiﬁed by its m/z, while disregarding data corresponding
to different m/z. With high-resolution instruments, speciﬁcity
of analysis can be improved by use of narrow m/z windows for
plotting extracted ion chromatograms. Such data processing
results in a reduced number of overlapping chromatographic
peaks from ions of nearby m/z thus improving the quantitative accuracy and the speciﬁcity (Fig. 2.3).
Sample preparation is critical to successful MS, particularly
when dealing with complex matrices, such as are commonly
encountered in clinical chemistry. This typically involves one
or more of the following steps: (1) protein precipitation
followed by centrifugation or ﬁltration, (2) solid-phase extraction, (3) liquid-liquid extraction, (4) afﬁnity enrichment, or
(5) derivatization (see Chapter 3).
Derivatization is the process of chemically modifying the
target compound(s) to be more favorably analyzed by MS.
Derivatization usually involves the addition of some welldeﬁned functional group. The goals of derivatization vary,
depending on the application, but typically include (1) increased
volatility, (2) greater thermal stability, (3) modiﬁed chromatographic properties, (4) greater ionization efﬁciency, (5) favorable
fragmentation properties, or a combination of these.

36

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry
×104
6

3

3

4

5

6

7

8
9
Time (min)

10

11

12

13

14

3

4

5

6

7

8
9
Time (min)

10

11

12

13

14

A
×103
2

1

B

FIGURE 2.3 Extracted ion chromatograms for a peptide ion of m/z 761.3718 using a window of 1 Da (A) and 0.0076 Da
(B). Arrows point on peak that is completely hidden in the chemical background noise while resolved from the noise using
mass extraction window of 0.0076 Da.

Analysis by MS can be used to target speciﬁc known
compounds (targeted analysis) or seek to identify one or
more unknown compounds in a sample (screening). When
only one or a few targeted analytes are of interest for quantitative analysis and their mass spectrum is known, the mass spectrometer is set to monitor only those ions of interest. This
selective detection technique is known as selected ion monitoring (SIM). Because SIM focuses on a limited number of
ions, more data points are collected for the selected m/z, which
results in better, more precise measurements. The SIM data acquisition increases the signal-to-noise ratio for the analyte of interest, improves the lower limit of detection, and enables more
accurate quantitation. One drawback of SIM is that it is based
around measurement of a nominal analyte mass. Most biological samples are highly complex, and thus it is not unexpected
to ﬁnd multiple compounds with very close or identical masses
in the matrix. In those cases, chromatography can aid in separation of these isobars; however, they still can affect a SIM
result should the isobar not be separated completely from
the analyte to be measured. By using a triple-quadrupole
mass analyzer, a method known as selected reaction monitoring (SRM) (or generalized for the analysis of many ions at
the same time, multiple reaction monitoring [MRM]) can be
used to help alleviate such potential issues. This is where the
ﬁrst quadrupole instrument is set to transmit the m/z of the
molecular ion, the analyte is caused to fragment in the second
quadrupole and the third quadrupole is set to transmit the m/z
of one or more known fragment ions from the analyte. In this
manner data similar to those gathered by SIM can be produced
but with added speciﬁcity from the structural information
gathered by the use of the fragment ion as a gatekeeper. A
more detailed description of MRM is given in the section of
this chapter on tandem mass spectrometers.
Screening methods (used here in the analytical chemistry
sense, not to be confused with screening in a clinical or
medical sense) are less common in clinical chemistry than
the analysis of target compounds; the main task for screening
methods is qualitative identiﬁcation of unknowns in a sample.

In most cases this reduces to the problem of matching chromatographic retention time and fragment ion patterns, that
is, mass and abundance patterns of either fragment ions generated in the source of a single-stage mass spectrometer or product ions from a collision cell in a tandem mass spectrometer.
A chemical element may be composed of a single or
multiple isotopes. Each isotope of an element has the same
number of protons in its nucleus but different numbers of neutrons. For example, naturally occurring carbon is composed
primarily of two isotopes: 12C, whose nuclei contain six protons
and six neutrons, and 13C, whose nuclei contain six protons
and seven neutrons. (Here we ignore 14C, which is generally
of negligible abundance compared to the other two isotopes.)
The natural abundance of 12C is approximately 98.9%, and
the natural abundance of 13C is approximately 1.1%. Some
elements, such as arsenic, have only a single isotope in the naturally occurring state, whereas other elements, such as tin, may
have as many as 10 naturally occurring isotopes.
When a compound is made of multiple atoms the isotope
pattern is a convolution of the isotope patterns of the
individual atoms. To illustrate with a simple example, carbon
monoxide (CO) has the following combinations of isotopes
12 16
C O (molecular weight 28), 13C16O (molecular weight
29), 12C17O (molecular weight 29), 12C18O (molecular weight
30), and 13C18O (molecular weight 31).
Nitrogen (N2) is isobaric with CO; that is, it has nearly the
same mass. However, the accurate masses of the isotope peaks
of isobars may differ. For example, the monoisotopic mass of
12 16 þ
C O (the isotopic peak composed of the most abundant
atomic isotopes) has an accurate mass of 27.9944 Da, whereas
the isobaric mass 28 Da peak of Nþ
2 has an accurate molecular
mass of 28.0056 Da. The small difference in masses of isobars
can be used to infer the chemical formula of a compound or
to conﬁrm the identity of a target compound. This technique
requires a mass analyzer capable of mass accuracy of a few
parts per million, is limited to compounds of a few hundred
Da or less, and it is not capable of discriminating between
isobars of the same chemical formula.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
Compounds that have the same chemical formulas but
different chemical structures are also isobars and might
therefore be referred to as strict isobars because they have exactly
the same mass. Succinic acid and methylmalonic acid provide
an example of a pair of compounds that are strict isobars
because they have the same chemical formula (C4H6O4). Unlike
isobars that have nearly the same masses but different accurate
masses, strict isobars cannot be separated or distinguished by
MS alone, although they often can be separated if MS is combined with a separation method or if tandem MS is applied.
Isotopic information also can be used to identify a
compound in a different way. Using COþ and Nþ
2 as
examples, the ﬁrst three isotopic peaks of COþ have a relative
abundance pattern of 0.986, 0.011, and 0.002, whereas the ﬁrst
three isotope peaks of Nþ
2 has a pattern of 0.993, 0.007, and
0.000. Differences in the isotopic pattern can be used to infer
the chemical formula of an unknown or to conﬁrm chemical
identity of a target compound. This technique requires accurate measurement of relative isotopic peak abundances and
is sometimes used in conjunction with accurate mass measurements, particularly when using TOF mass spectrometers.
A distinct advantage of the mass spectrometer is that it can
distinguish between ions of the same chemical formula that
have different masses because of the different isotopic composition. To illustrate with a trivial and simple example, 12C16Oþ
has a different mass than 12C18Oþ, and these two forms can be
separated and detected in a mass spectrometer. One can take
advantage of this fact by using artiﬁcially labeled forms of a
target analyte. The labeling consists of substitution of a less
common isotope for one or more of the atoms in the analyte,
for example, substituting 2H for 1H, 13C for 12C, or 15N for
14
N. The substituted molecule is prepared artiﬁcially and
added to the sample as an internal standard, which behaves
nearly identically to the native compounds during sample
preparation and chromatographic separation. In this respect,
13
C or 15N is generally preferred over 2H labeling because
2
H-labeled compounds sometimes exhibit chromatographic
shifts compared to unlabeled compounds, whereas 13C- or
15
N-labeled compounds generally do not. A quantitative analysis can then be carried out by comparison of the signal from

the native compound versus the artiﬁcially added labeled
version of the compound spiked into the sample.
An internal standard should be selected to have a sufﬁcient
number of isotopic ions so that no naturally occurring
isotopes (such as 2H or 13C) of the analyte of interest would
signiﬁcantly contribute to the signal of the internal standard.
For the methamphetamine derivatives shown in Figure 2.4, A,
an internal standard with at least three 2H or 13C atoms is
preferred, because contribution of the natural abundance of
these isotopes to the molecular ion [(M þ 3)þ] would be
z0.1%. The position of the stable isotope atoms within the
molecule and the number of isotopic ions within the structure
is also important for adequate performance of the methods.8
For example, the m/z 204 ion for methamphetamine represents the aliphatic portion of the molecule (loss of the aromatic ring). If three deuterium atoms were located on the
aromatic ring of the pentaﬂuoropropionyl derivative of methamphetamine, the native and the isotope-labeled molecules
would both yield the m/z 204 ion. This m/z 204 ion would
therefore fail to distinguish the native compound from the
isotope-labeled compound and would therefore not be useful
as an internal standard. On the other hand, if 2H labeling were
to occur in the aliphatic portion of the molecule, the fragment
ion analogous to the m/z 204 fragment ion would be labeled,
producing a higher m/z than 204 (eg, 207), and the ion could
be useful as an internal standard. The same comments apply
to the compound illustrated in Figure 2.4, B.
These concepts of internal standard selection must be
modiﬁed slightly when applied to tandem MS. For example,
it is possible for a native compound and the internal standard
to have product ions of the same m/z, because they can be
distinguished by their differing precursor ion masses.
When using hydrogen (2H) labeling the stable isotope
must be located on atoms from which it will not be exchangeable with hydrogen atoms in solution or in gas phase (in the
ion source). For example, deuterium labeling of an acidic
hydrogen position would be useless because the 2H would
easily exchange with protons in the matrix, making the
original labeling moot. Certain other labeling positions also
must be avoided. The hydrogen atoms in the constituent

118 m/z
O 119 m/z

CH3
CH2

CH

NH

R
58 (44) m/z

A

91 m/z

C CF2 CF3
147 m/z

204 (190) m/z
308 (294) m/z
280 (266) m/z
262 (248) m/z
O

CH3
CH2

B

91 m/z
118 m/z

CH

NH

37

O

C CF2 CF2 CF2 C

O

CH2

CH3

R

FIGURE 2.4 Fragmentation patterns for the pentaﬂuoropropionyl (A) and carbethoxyhexaﬂuorobutyryl (B) derivatives of
methamphetamine (R ¼ CH3) and amphetamine (R ¼ H; masses in parentheses). Compare the predicted masses with
the spectrum shown in Figure 2.1. Note that for the pentaﬂuoropropionyl derivative, only one ion [204 (190) m/z] is
characteristic of the aliphatic portion of the molecule.

38

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

groups of alcohols, amines, amides, and thiols all may readily
exchange with hydrogen ions in an aqueous matrix.
A technique of quantitative analysis of compounds relative
to their isotopic analogs added to the samples at known or
ﬁxed concentration is called isotope dilution analysis or
isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS). The IDMS
technique has been used to develop deﬁnitive methods for
a number of clinically relevant analytes, including drugs of
abuse and disease markers.
MS is often referred to as a highly sensitive technique.
Sensitivity is a somewhat problematic term because it is
used in two different ways. In an ofﬁcial deﬁnition9,10 it
means the slope of a calibration curve (or more generally, a
change in signal vs the change in concentration), but far
more commonly it is used to signify the ability to detect or
quantify an analyte at very low concentration; that is, a highly
sensitive technique would be able to detect or quantify a very
low concentration of the target analyte.

INSTRUMENTATION
A mass spectrometer consists of (1) an ion source, (2) a
vacuum system, (3) a mass analyzer, (4) a detector, and (5)
a computer (Fig. 2.5).

three ion sources takes place at atmospheric pressure. Other
ionization techniques include (1) inductively coupled plasma
(ICP), (2) MALDI (see Chapter 4), (3) atmospheric pressure
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization, and others. This
chapter will limit its discussion primarily to ion sources of
interest to clinical applications of MS. The CLSI documents
C-50A and C-62A contain recommendations for matching
the capabilities of different ion source technologies to various
application classes.1,2

Electron Ionization
In EI, gas-phase molecules are bombarded by electrons
emitted from a heated ﬁlament and attracted to a collector
electrode (Fig. 2.6). To prevent ﬁlament oxidation, as well
as to minimize scattering of the electron beam, this process
must occur in a vacuum. EI is typically performed using
electrons with a kinetic energy of 70 eV; collision of electrons
having such energy with most organic molecules results in
formation of radical cations, that is, a structure that is both
a positively charged ion and a radical.15 A radical is a molecule or ion with an unpaired electron. The radical ion
then often undergoes unimolecular rearrangement and
dissociation to produce a cation and an uncharged radical:
ABþ /Aþ þ B

Ion Source
Many approaches have been used to form ions in both highvacuum and near-atmospheric pressure conditions. EI and CI
are ionization techniques used when gas-phase molecules are
introduced directly into an ion source operated at very low
pressure, often from a gas chromatograph. In other analyses,
such as high-performance liquid chromatographyemass
spectrometry (HPLC-MS), ESI, atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization (APCI), and atmospheric pressure photoionization
(APPI) ion sources are often used.11-14 Ionization in these

Chromatograph

TIC
EIP

Spectra
Lib Match

Positive ions are drawn out of the ionization chamber by
an electrical ﬁeld. The cations are then electrostatically
focused and introduced into the mass analyzer. EI is primarily
used as an ion source in GC-MS. Because the same ion energy
(70 eV) is used in commercial instruments using EI, and
because the fragmentation pattern is only weakly dependent
on small deviations from 70 eV, fragmentation patterns
observed using an EI source are reasonably reproducible
among the GC-MS instruments. The fragmentation pattern
Gas phase
sample

SIM

Inlet Port
Filament
(cathode)
Ion source

Repeller

Computer
Ionization

N
Magnet

Mass analyzer(s)

Anode

Vacuum system

S
Magnet

Chamber
Draw out
Focus
Accelerating
voltage

Exit slit
Ion beam
(free flight region)

Detector

FIGURE

2.5 Block diagram of the components of a
chromatographemass spectrometer system. The mass analyzer
and the detector are always under vacuum. The ion source
may be under vacuum or under near-atmospheric pressure
conditions, depending on the ionization mode. The computer
system is an integral part of data acquisition and output. EIP,
Extracted ion proﬁle; SIM, selected ion monitoring; TIC, total ion
current.

FIGURE 2.6 Electron impact ion source. The small magnets are
used to collimate a dense electron beam, which is drawn from a
heated ﬁlament placed at a negative potential. The electron
beam is positioned in front of a repeller, which is at a slightly
positive potential compared with the ion source. The repeller
sends any positively charged fragment ions toward the opening
at the front of the ion source. The accelerating plates strongly
attract the positively charged fragment ions.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
is therefore often used as a ﬁngerprint to identify compounds
by matching mass spectra of unknowns to the entries in the
mass spectral libraries.

Chemical Ionization
CI is a soft ionization technique in which a proton is
transferred to, or abstracted from, a gas-phase molecule by
a reagent gas molecule such as methane, ammonia (NH3),
isobutane, or water. The reagent gas is supplied into a CI
ion source at a pressure of about 0.1 torr. (Note: For virtually
all practical purposes, torr is equivalent to millimeters of mercury and is the more customary term used in the ﬁeld of MS).
An electron beam produces reactive species through a series
of ion-molecule reactions, intermediate species (such as
methonium [CHþ
5 ] if methane is the CI reagent gas); further
ion-molecule reactions can cause analyte ions to become
charged, usually via attachment of a proton. In most cases,
relatively little fragmentation occurs, and for the majority
of the molecules, only molecular ions (in the form of a protonated version of the neutral molecule) are observed in the
mass spectra; the lack of fragmentation enhances sensitivity
of detection. Negative ion electron capture CI has become
popular for quantiﬁcation of drugs such as benzodiazepines.
Negative ions are formed when thermalized electrons are
captured by electronegative functional groups, such as chlorine or ﬂuorine atoms within structure of the molecule. Negative ion CI often leads to very low limits of detection.

Electrospray Ionization
ESI is a soft ionization technique in which a sample is ionized
at atmospheric pressure before introduction into the mass
analyzer.16,17 An efﬂuent from a separation device, typically
an HPLC, is passed through a narrow metal or fused silica
capillary to which a 1- to 5-kV voltage has been applied
(Fig. 2.7, A). The partial charge separation between the liquid

and the capillary results in instability in the liquid that in turn
results in expulsion of charged droplets from a Taylor cone,
which forms at the tip of the capillary (Fig. 2.8). In many
variations of ESI a coaxial nebulizing gas aids in nebulization
and helps direct the charged droplets toward a counterelectrode as well as speeding up the evaporative process. As
droplets evaporate while migrating through the atmospheric
pressure region, they expel smaller droplets as the charge-tovolume ratio exceeds the Raleigh instability limit. The
adducts of the molecules (with solvent molecules, NH3,
etc.) are desolvated to form bare ions that are typically
formed in the ionization process. However, other ionization
products are sometimes observed, such as metal ion adducts,
or ions formed by redox processes. Ions then pass through a
sampling cone and one or more extraction cones (skimmers)
before entering the high-vacuum region of the mass analyzer.
One feature of ESI is the production of multiple charged
ions, particularly from peptides and proteins. It is common
to observe approximately one charge for every 10 to 15 amino
acid residues in a protein. For example, for a molecule of
mass 20,000, 20 charges supplied by the addition of 20
protons would be detected at m/z approximately 1000 [or
more correctly, m/z 1001 ¼ (20,000 þ 20)/20]. This
phenomenon greatly extends the accessible mass range of
an instrument. It is frequently observed that a distribution
of charges occurs; in cases of multiple charged molecules,
one usually observes a series of peaks, with each peak corresponding to a different number of charges. Multiply charged
ions are also observed for nucleic acid polymers, particularly
when ESI mass spectra are acquired in negative ion mode.
It should be noted that Figure 2.7 is a simpliﬁed
illustration of the probe being directed toward the sampling
cone of the mass detector. To enhance performance and
minimize contamination of the mass analyzer, modern
hardware conﬁgurations have offset the probe and/or the
Curtain gas

5 kV

Nebulizer
gas

Mass
detector
Sample
solution
ⴙⴙ
ⴙ ⴙ
ⴙ

A

ⴙ
ⴙ ⴙ
ⴙ

ⴙ

(M⫹H)⫹

ⴙ

(M⫹H)⫹

ⴙ

Corona discharge

Curtain gas

5 kV

Nebulizer
gas

Mass
detector
Sample
solution

B

M

CH3OH⫹
2

CH3OH⫹
2

CH3OH
5 kV

M

M

(M⫹H)⫹
CH3OH

FIGURE 2.7 Schematics of (A) electrospray and (B) atmospheric pressure chemical ionization sources. Note the different
points where ionization occurs, as described in the text.

39

40

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry
Nebulizing gas
Taylor cone

Droplet
plume

From HPLC

Jet

FIGURE 2.8 Simpliﬁed conceptual schematic of electrospray ion source showing Taylor cone. HPLC, High-performance
liquid chromatography. (Published with permission from Eclipse Business Media Ltd. Reprinted from MS Solutions, Issue
7 [2010]. http://www.sepscience.com/Information/Archive/MS-Solutions/235-/MS-Solutions-7-Adjusting-Electrospray-Voltagefor-Optimum-Results.)

mass detector relative to the sampling cone; in some
instruments the spray is orthogonal to the sampling cone.
ESI tends to be an efﬁcient ion source for polar
compounds or for molecules that are present as ions in
solution, which includes a majority of biomolecules. ESI,
along with APCI, allows an effective interface between a
liquid chromatograph and a mass spectrometer. ESI and
APCI have become the most widely used ion sources in
mass spectrometers used in clinical laboratories.
As already mentioned, electrospray is considered a soft
ionization source. However, it is also possible to generate
fragment ions before mass analysis using a technique known
as nozzle-skimmer dissociation,18 infrared multiphoton
dissociation,19 and thermally induced dissociation.20 In these
methods, ions are heated before entering the mass analyzer,
and this causes ions to dissociate into fragment ions. In
nozzle-skimmer dissociation, a higher than normal voltage
gradient is applied in the ﬁrst low-pressure region of the
electrospray interface, resulting in collisional heating of the
ions. In infrared multiphoton dissociation, ions are subjected
to an intense bombardment of infrared photons, resulting in
heating of the ions, followed by dissociation. In thermally
induced dissociation, ions are activated and dissociated by
excess heating of the gas used to transport ions from
atmospheric pressure to the vacuum system of the mass
spectrometer.

Atmospheric Pressure Chemical Ionization
APCI is similar to ESI in the sense that ionization takes
place at atmospheric pressure, involves nebulization and
desolvation, and uses the same design of the ion extraction
cone as ESI. The major difference lies in the mode of
ionization. In APCI, no high voltage is applied to the inlet
capillary. Instead, the mobile phase from the separation device gets evaporated and the vapor passes by a needle with
applied current.21 This process generates a corona discharge.
Somewhat analogously to the processes occurring in a CI
source, ions generated by the corona discharge undergo variety of ion-molecule reactions such as the following:
CH3 OH þ H

þ

/CH3 OHþ
2

þ
AðanalyteÞ þ CH3 OHþ
2 /AH þ CH3 OH

or
H2 O þ Hþ /H3 Oþ
AðanalyteÞ þ H3 Oþ /AHþ þ H2 O
Because solvent molecules from the evaporated mobile
phase (eg, water, methanol, acetonitrile) are present in the
vapor in excess relative to the sample constituents, they are
predominantly ionized early in the ion molecule cascade of
reactions and then act as a reagent gas that reacts secondarily
to ionize analyte molecules (see Fig. 2.7, B). The products of
these secondary reactions may contain clusters of solvent and
analyte molecules, and thus a heated transfer tube or a
countercurrent ﬂow of a curtain gas, such as nitrogen, is
used to decluster the ions. As with ESI, APCI is a soft
ionization technique that produces relatively little
fragmentation. However, unlike ESI, APCI uses much higher
heat and this can cause pyrolysis of the compound leading to
loss of metabolically induced modiﬁcations to targeted
compounds (glucuronidation, glutathionylation, etc.) and
therefore can cause issues with analyses (in the methods
that do not chromatographically resolve peaks of unconjugated and conjugated targeted molecules). On the other
hand, in methods using ESI at lower temperature, those
modiﬁcations tend to remain intact. When compared with
EI, the mass spectra produced by APCI, ESI, and other soft
ionization techniques typically have fewer fragments and
are less useful for analyte identiﬁcation by mass spectral
ﬁngerprinting. However, because the ion current is
concentrated into a single mass spectral peak (or relatively
few mass spectral peaks), APCI and other soft ionization
sources are well matched to the requirements of tandem
MS (discussed later) and are well suited for quantitative
analysis. APCI and ESI are the most commonly used ion
sources in quantitative analysis. However, in the case of
nonpolar compounds such as steroids and some drug
molecules, APCI is often a more efﬁcient ion source than ESI.

Atmospheric Pressure Photoionization
APPI is a relatively new and less frequently used ion source in
clinical chemistry that provides a complementary ionization
approach to ESI or APCI. The physical conﬁguration of an
APPI source is similar to that for APCI, but an ultraviolet

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
photon ﬂux (typically Krypton lamp that emits photons at 10
Ev) is used instead of a corona discharge needle to generate
ions in the gas phase.22-24 In APPI, an ionizable dopant,
such as toluene or acetone, is often infused coaxially to the
nebulizer to provide a source of ions that participate in charge
or proton transfer to analyte molecules, thus increasing the
efﬁciency of analyte ionization. APPI has a similar range of
application to APCI and could be more useful than APCI
for compounds of very low polarity, such as some steroids.

Inductively Coupled Plasma
ICP, as ESI, APCI, and APPI, is an atmospheric pressure
ionization method. However, unlike most atmospheric
pressure ionization methods, which are soft (ie, producing
little fragmentation), ICP is the ultimate in hard ionization,
typically leading to complete atomization of the sample
during ionization. Consequently, its primary use is for
elemental analysis. In the clinical laboratory, it is particularly
useful for trace element analysis in tissues or body ﬂuids. ICP
is extremely sensitive (eg, parts per trillion limits of
detection) and is capable of extremely wide dynamic ranges.
After sample preparation, which generally includes the
addition of an internal standard such as yttrium and sometimes includes an acid digestion step, the sample is
introduced into the ion source, usually via a nebulizer fed
by a peristaltic pump. The nebulized sample is transmitted
into hot plasma generated at atmospheric pressure by inductively coupling power into the plasma using a high-powered,
radiofrequency (RF) generator (Fig. 2.9).25 The temperature
of the plasma is typically 6000 to 10,000 K (comparable to
the temperature of the surface of the sun). Sample is introduced in the plasma, and ions are transmitted to the mass
analyzer through a series of differential pumping stages.
The atmospheric sampling apparatus is conceptually similar
to that of other atmospheric pressure ion sources, such as
electrospray, except that the device must withstand the
extremely high temperatures generated by the plasma.
ICP-MS is comparatively free from most interference.
However, some interfering species can be extremely troublesome. Most interfering species are small polyatomic ions

41

formed in the torch via ion-molecule reactions. For example,
argon oxide (ArOþ) interferes with iron at m/z 56. One
solution to this problem is to use a reaction cell, which
consists of a moderate-pressure gas region in front of the
m/z analyzer,26 with a reactant gas, such as NH3, bled into
the reaction cell. The reactant gas reacts with polyatomic
interferences and removes them before introduction into
the m/z analyzer. A related technique uses a nonreactive
collision gas, which removes interferences using collisions,
relying on differences in collision cross-sections between
polyatomic ions and atomic ions. Another approach to
removing interferences of the same nominal mass is to use
a high-resolution mass spectrometer, which is capable of
resolving species with similar nominal mass.26 For example,
the masses of ArOþ and 56Feþ differ by 0.022 Dada
difference that may be resolved using a high-resolution
mass spectrometer.

Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization
MALDI is another type of soft ionization method that
typically produces singly charged ions. MALDI and related
techniques rely on energy transfer processes from a pulsed
laser beam to the sample for ion generation. In most cases,
the analyte is dissolved in a solution containing a solid phase
matrix, a small molecular weight UV-absorbing compound,
and this solution is placed on a target and dried. A pulsed
laser irradiates the dried spots, triggering ablation, and
desorption of the sample and matrix material; ions produced
in the process are accelerated and introduced into the mass
analyzer (Fig. 2.10). In other cases a layer of the solid matrix
is deposited on the target and allowed to crystalize, and then
the sample applied on top. The sample causes the top portion
of the matrix to solubilize and mix with the sample before
recrystallizing. In this way the sample is maintained in the
very outer layer of the matrix, and this can help with
enhancing the sensitivity and reducing the background noise.
A related technique includes atmospheric pressure matrixassisted laser desorption/ionization, in which the MALDI
process occurs at atmospheric pressure rather than reduced
pressure (see Chapter 4).

FIGURE 2.9 Simpliﬁed conceptual schematic of inductively coupled plasmaemass spectrometer (ICP-MS). Q-pole,
Quadrupole. (From Kannamkumarath S, Wrobel K, Wrobel K, et al. Capillary electrophoresiseinductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry: an attractive complementary technique for elemental speciation analysis. J Chromatogr A
2002;975:245e266.)

42

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry
Incoming UV laser light

Into mass
analyzer
Sample
stage

Analyte
ions
Matrix ions and
neutrals
Crystallized matrix
with included analyte

FIGURE 2.10 A generic view of the process of matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization. Co-crystallized matrix and analyte
molecules are irradiated with an ultraviolet (UV) laser. The laser
vaporizes the matrix, producing a plume of matrix ions, analyte
ions, and neutrals. Gas-phase ions are directed into a mass
analyzer.

Ionization Methods of Potential Interest
Desorption electrospray ionization (DESI)27 and direct analysis
in real time (DART)28 are two relatively new ionization
methods that generate ions from surfaces at atmospheric pressure. Most applications of DESI and DART to date have been
directed toward minimal sample preparation. Paper spray MS
is another emerging ionization method of potential interest. It
is essentially a version of electrospray MS, but the spray is
generated at the point of a triangular cut in a solvent-wetted
piece of paper rather than from a capillary. It has the feature
of easily integrating paper chromatography with MS.29 It
also has been used for rapid measurement of therapeutic drugs
from dried blood spots without the need for complex sample
preparation and separation.30
Ionization Methods of Historical Interest
The older literature includes several ionization methods or
sample introduction methods that, although promising, or
even widely used at one time, hold little interest for current
practice in clinical chemistry. Nevertheless, it is useful to be
aware of them because they may still be referred to in the
literature from time to time. Some of these include (1) fast
atom bombardment, (2) thermospray, (3) direct liquid
introduction, (4) plasma desorption, (5) ﬁeld ionization, (6)
ﬁeld desorption, (7) secondary ion mass spectrometry, and (8)
laser desorption. ESI and APCI ion sources have largely
rendered these techniques obsolete.

Vacuum System
With the exception of certain ion trap mass spectrometers,
ion separation in any of the mass analyzers requires that

the ions do not collide with other molecules during their
interaction with magnetic or electric ﬁelds. This requires
the use of a vacuum from 103 to 109 torr, depending on
mass analyzer type. The length of the ion path in the analyzer
must be less than the mean free path length, unless collisions
play a role in mass analysis.
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR)
requires the lowest pressure (109 torr). The quadrupole
ion trap (QIT) tolerates the highest pressure (103 to 105
torr), a pressure range in which some collisions occur
between ions and background gas. Routine quality assurance
checks for vacuum leaks should include evaluation of the
presence of air and water in the mass spectra.
Efﬁcient high-vacuum pumps generally do not operate
well near atmospheric pressure. Thus the vacuum system
must have a positive displacement (mechanical) vacuum
pump to evacuate the system to a pressure at which the
high-vacuum pumps are effective. Mechanical pumps require
routine maintenance, such as ballasting and replacing the
pump oil.
Although diffusion pumps are the least expensive and
most reliable high-vacuum pump, they are rarely used
outside of some very specialized mass spectrometers that
typically are not used in the clinical laboratory. Cryopumps
are another class of pumps that are sometimes used in
specialized mass spectrometers but not in the clinical
laboratory. In modern instruments, the most common
high-vacuum pumps are turbomolecular (often referred to
as “turbo”) pumps; they have largely replaced diffusion
pumps and cryopumps because they are more convenient
to use. A key consideration in the design of the vacuum
system is pumping speed. The ability of the pump to maintain the vacuum by removing any gas (or solvent vapor)
that enters the system determines the maximum ﬂow rate
of gas introduced into the mass spectrometer. In general,
higher pump capacities are associated with lower detection
limits because noise arising from the gas background is
reduced.

Mass Analyzers, Tandem Mass Spectrometers, and
Ion Detectors
The term mass spectrometry is somewhat a misnomer because
mass spectrometers do not measure molecular mass, but
rather they measure the mass-to-charge ratio. This fact is
fundamental to the physical operating principles of mass
spectrometers and consequently affects all aspects of instrumentation design, instrument operation, and interpretation
of results. The symbol m/z is used to denote mass-to-charge
ratio and conventionally has been deﬁned as a dimensionless
quantity31 (see also http://goldbook.iupac.org/M03752.html).
However, a “dimensionless” mass-to-charge ratio is not
consistent with equations of ion motion in the presence of electric and magnetic ﬁelds, which require units of mass divided by
charge. Furthermore, the m/z scale sometimes is loosely discussed in terms of daltons (also known as uniﬁed atomic
mass units [u]), although strictly speaking, Da is a unit of
mass, not mass-to-charge ratio. Despite these somewhat
confusing nomenclature issues, the present chapter generally
follows convention by discussing m/z in terms of mass and Da.
To help avoid some of the confusion surrounding the use
of m/z, it has been proposed that it should be deﬁned

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
explicitly as quantity having units of mass-to-charge ratio,
with mass speciﬁed in daltons and charge speciﬁed in
elementary charges; this proposed unit would be called the
Thomson (Th) in honor of one of the pioneers of MS.32-34
This terminology is sometimes seen in the literature but
has not been widely adopted.

General Classes of Mass Spectrometers
Mass spectrometers are broadly classiﬁed into two groups:
beam-type instruments and trapping-type instruments. In a
beam-type instrument, the ions make one pass through the
instrument and then strike the detector, where they are
destructively detected. The entire process, from the time an
ion enters the analyzer until the time it is detected, generally
takes microseconds to milliseconds.
In a trapping-type analyzer, ions are held in a spatially
conﬁned region of space through a combination of magnetic
and/or electrostatic and/or RF electrical ﬁelds. The trapping
ﬁelds or supplemental ﬁelds are applied and manipulated in
ways that allow m/z measurements to be performed. Trapping
times may range from a fraction of a second to minutes,
although most clinical applications are at the low end of
this range.
Examples of trapping-type instruments include QITs,
linear ion traps (which, along with QITs, also depend on
RF electric ﬁelds), ICR mass spectrometers, electrostatic ion
traps, and orbitraps (which are a type of electrostatic ion
traps).
Detection of the ions in a trapping-type instrument may
be destructive or nondestructive, depending on the speciﬁc
type of mass spectrometer used. In this context, destructive
means that ions are destroyed in the detection process.
Additional discussions of mass analyzers, tandem mass
spectrometers, and ion detectors can be found in the
literature,33,35 and the CLSI documents C-50A and C-62A
contain recommendations for matching the capabilities of
different m/z analyzers to various application classes.1,2
Beam-Type Designs. The main beam-type mass
spectrometer designs are (1) quadrupole, (2) magnetic
sector, and (3) TOF. It is convenient to categorize beamtype instruments into two broad categories, those that
produce a mass spectrum by scanning the m/z range over a
period (quadrupole and magnetic sectors) and those that
acquire instantaneous snapshots of the mass spectrum
(TOF). This categorization is not hard and fast. Certain
instrument designs have been adapted to scanning or
nonscanning operations. Nevertheless, the categorization is
a useful one because it covers the majority of instruments
currently available and because scanning and nonscanning
instruments are adapted for different optimal usages.
Quadrupole. Quadrupole mass spectrometers, sometimes known as quadrupole mass ﬁlters (QMFs), are
currently the most widely used mass spectrometers, having
displaced magnetic sector mass spectrometers as the standard
instrument. Although these instruments lag behind magnetic
sector instruments in terms of (1) sensitivity, (2) upper mass
range, (3) resolution, and (4) mass accuracy, they offer an
attractive and practical set of features that account for
their popularity, including (1) ease of use, (2) ﬂexibility,
(3) adequate performance for most applications, (4) relatively

43

low cost, (5) small size, (6) noncritical site requirements, and
(7) highly developed data collection software systems.
A quadrupole mass spectrometer consists of four parallel
electrically conductive rods arranged in a square array
(Fig. 2.11). The four rods form a long channel through which
the ion beam passes. The beam enters near the axis at one end
of the array, passes through the array in a direction generally
parallel to the axis, and exits at the far end of the array. The
ion beam entering the quadrupole array may contain a
mixture of ions of various m/z values, and in different modes
of operation, different mass ranges can be selected. If a very
narrow m/z range is selected (eg, Dm/z <1) only ions of
the speciﬁed m/z will be transported through the device to
reach the detector. Ions outside this narrow range are ejected
radially. The Dm/z range represents a pass band, analogous to
the pass band of an interference ﬁlter in optics. This is why
quadrupole mass spectrometers are often referred to as
mass ﬁlters rather than mass spectrometers.
Separation of ions in QMS is based on a superposition of
RF and constant direct current, or DC potentials applied to
the quadrupole rods. DC voltages are applied to the electrodes in a quadrupolar pattern. For example, a positive
DC potential is applied to electrodes 1 and 3, as indicated
in Figure 2.12, and an equivalent negative DC potential is
applied to electrodes 2 and 4. The DC potentials are relatively
small, on the order of a few volts. Superimposed on the DC
potentials are RF potentials, also applied in a quadrupolar
fashion. RF potentials range up to the kilovolt range, and
frequency is on the order of 1 MHz. In the most frequently
used mode of operation the frequency is ﬁxed and highly
stable, derived from a crystal controlled oscillator.
The physical principles underlying the operation of a
quadrupole mass spectrometer are rigorously described by
solutions of a complicated differential equation, the Mathieu
equation.36 When an ion is subjected to a quadrupolar RF
ﬁeld, its trajectory is described qualitatively as a combination
of fast and slow oscillatory motions. For descriptive purposes,
the fast component will be ignored here. The slow

⫺
⫹

⫹
y
⫺

z
x

FIGURE 2.11 Diagram of quadrupole mass ﬁlter, including the
radiofrequency part of voltages applied to the quadrupole rods.

44

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

⫺
⫹

⫹
⫺

A

B

C

D

y
z
x

⫺

⫹

FIGURE 2.12 Direct current voltages applied to quadrupole rod
assembly.

component oscillates about the quadrupolar axis; this
resembles the motion of a particle in a ﬁctitious harmonic
pseudopotential. The frequency of this oscillation is
sometimes called the secular frequency.
Effective force associated with the pseudopotential is
directed inward toward the quadrupolar axis and is proportional to the distance from the axis. It therefore acts as a
conﬁning force, preventing ions from being ejected radially
from the quadrupolar assembly. Figure 2.13, A, shows an
example of an ion conﬁned by an RF-only quadrupole. Below
a certain m/z cutoff frequency (which depends on the
frequency and amplitude of the RF ﬁeld), ions are ejected
rather than conﬁned. Figure 2.13, B, shows an example of
an ion ejected by an RF-only quadrupolar ﬁeld. This
establishes the low mass cutoff for the m/z pass band. The
effective conﬁning force is strongest just above the low m/z
cutoff and then decreases asymptotically toward zero at
high m/z.
The DC part of the quadrupolar potential is independent
of m/z. Positive ions are attracted toward the negative poles.
Negative ions are attracted toward the positive poles.
Attraction increases as the distance from the quadrupolar
axis increases. Because a quadrupolar DC potential always
has both negative and positive poles, the quadrupolar DC
potential always contributes to ejection in at least one
direction. Whether ejection of an ion of a particular m/z
actually occurs depends on whether the ejecting force caused
by the quadrupolar DC potential overcomes the effective
conﬁning force caused by the pseudopotential generated by
the RF ﬁeld. Above a certain m/z value, the DC part dominates and ions are ejected radially from the device.
This establishes an upper m/z limit for ion transmission.
Figures 2.13, C and D, show examples of ion trajectories
under the inﬂuence of combined RF-DC ﬁelds, one being
conﬁned and the other being ejected. Trajectories in
Figure 2.13 were calculated using the Simion ion optics
computer program.37
A rigorous description of low- and high-mass cutoffs is
found in so-called stability diagrams, which graphically
describe the lower and upper m/z cutoffs of a quadrupole
mass spectrometer in terms of parameters related to voltages,

FIGURE 2.13 Ion trajectories showing conﬁnement and ejection
in quadrupole mass ﬁlters. A, Ion conﬁnement by radiofrequency
(RF)-only ﬁeld. B, Ion ejection by RF-only ﬁeld. C, Ion conﬁnement
with a combination of RF and direct current (DC) ﬁelds. D, Ion
ejection with a combination of RF and DC ﬁelds. All trajectories
were simulated using Simion software. (Courtesy Scientiﬁc
Instrument Services, Ringoes, New Jersey.)

frequencies, and m/z. However, a full discussion of the
stability diagram is outside of the scope of this chapter.
The combination of lower and upper m/z limits establishes
a pass band (Dm/z) and ultimately a resolution [(m/z)/(Dm/
z)]. With relatively few exceptions, quadrupole instruments
are limited to a resolution of a few hundred to several
thousand, which is sufﬁcient to achieve isotopic resolution
for singly charged ions of m/z as high as several thousand.
A quadrupole MS may be operated in SIM mode or
scanning mode. In SIM mode, both DC and RF voltages
are ﬁxed. Consequently, both the center of the pass band
and the width of the pass band are ﬁxed. For example, the
mass spectrometer may be set to pass ions of m/z 363 
0.5. Both the center m/z and the Dm/z are adjusted by the
appropriate choice of DC and RF.
In the scanning mode of operation, the RF and/or DC
voltages are continuously varied to scan a range of the
speciﬁed m/z values. As with the SIM mode, the Dm/z is
determined by the RF and DC voltages. Usually the scan
function is designed to maintain a constant Dm/z across the
full m/z range. Thus the resolution increases as m/z increases.
The value of Dm/z is frequently chosen in the range 0.5 to 0.7
to resolve isotopic peaks of singly charged species across the
full m/z range.
Magnetic Sector. Because magnetic sector mass spectrometers are rarely used in clinical laboratories, they will
not be described in detail here. It should be noted, however,
that these classic mass spectrometers are easy to understand
(given a basic understanding of physics); are versatile,
reliable, and highly sensitive; and in their “double focusing”
design are capable of very high m/z resolution and mass
accuracy. However, they are typically very large, expensive,
and have the reputation of being difﬁcult to use.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
Consequently, other instruments have largely displaced
magnetic sector mass spectrometers.
Time-of-Flight. TOF mass spectrometry (TOF-MS) is a
nonscanning technique whereby a full mass spectrum is
acquired as a snapshot rather than by sweeping through a
sequential series of m/z values while acquiring the data. It is
described here as a snapshot because, although ions of
different m/z arrive at the detector sequentially (low m/z
ﬁrst), the samples are loaded into the ion source with little or
no m/z discrimination with regard to time, and the duration
of the acquisition of a single mass spectrum is measured in
microseconds. One implication of this is that if the
composition of the sample stream being presented to the
mass spectrometer changes with time, there is essentially no
distortion of the mass spectrum resulting from this time
dependence, whereas with scanning-type mass spectrometers
the mass spectrum may be distorted because of the interaction between scan time of the mass spectrometer and the
changing concentration of the sample stream. This is
particularly signiﬁcant when dealing with fast chromatography coupled to MS.
TOF mass spectrometers have several advantages, including
(1) a nearly unlimited m/z range, (2) high acquisition speed,
(3) high mass accuracy, (4) moderate to high resolution, (5)
moderate to high sensitivity, (6) absence of spectral distortions
when used in conjunction with fast separations and narrow
chromatographic peaks, and (7) reasonable cost. TOF-MS is
also well adapted to pulsed ionization sources, which is an
advantage in some applications, particularly with MALDI
and related techniques.38
A major advantage of modern TOF mass spectrometers is
that they are capable of acquiring accurate mass measurements, sometimes loosely referred to as exact mass, which is
typically accurate to a few parts per million (ppm). This
allows TOF measurements to conﬁrm the molecular formula
of a compound and assist with identiﬁcation of unknowns in
the mass spectra. TOF mass spectrometers are conceptually
simple to understand because they are based on the fact
that in vacuum a lighter ion travels faster than a heavier
ion, provided that both have the same kinetic energy.
Figure 2.14 presents a simpliﬁed conceptual diagram of a
TOF mass spectrometer. It resembles a long pipe wherein
ions are created or injected at the source end of the device
and are then accelerated by the applied potential of several
kilovolts. The ions travel down the ﬂight tube and strike
the detector at the far end. The time it takes to traverse the
tube is known as the ﬂight time; this is related to the
mass-to-charge ratio of the ion.
The ﬂight time for an ion of mass m and kinetic energy
E to travel a distance L in a region free of electric ﬁelds is
given by:


m
t¼L
2E

1=2

A sample calculation for an ion of molecular weight
200 Da (3.32  1025 kg) with a kinetic energy of 10 keV
(1.60  1015 J), traveling through a distance of 1 m, yields
a ﬂight time of 10.18 ms, and an ion of molecular weight
201 takes just 25 ns longer. To accurately capture such ﬂeeting
signals, the data recording system must operate on an

45
Detector

Ion

FIGURE

Trajectory

2.14 Diagram

of

simpliﬁed

time-of-ﬂight

mass

spectrometer.

approximately 1 ns or shorter time-scale. Advances in signal
processing electronics have made these mass analyzers
possible at a modest cost, and this has been a major factor
in the rise in popularity of TOF-MS.
TOF is inherently a pulsed technique; it couples readily to
pulsed ionization methods, with MALDI being the most
common example, although TOF is also coupled with
continuous ion sources such as EI, ESI, and APCI. However,
the continuous nature of these sources causes a mismatch
between continuous introduction of ions from the ion source
and a pulsed detection with TOF-MS. This mismatch is
overcome by using a technique known as orthogonal
acceleration TOF-MS (OA-TOF-MS), in which the ion
beam is injected orthogonal to the axis of the TOF-MS.39-41
During the injection period, the acceleration voltage is
turned off. Once the injection region is ﬁlled with the
traversing beam, the acceleration voltage is quickly turned
on and the TOF timing cycle starts. The process is cycled
repeatedly. The overall duty cycle for this method can be
more than 10%; this represents a vast improvement over
the traditional method of gating the ion beam for TOF
analysis. For full spectrum capability with continuous ion
sources, orthogonal injection TOF mass spectrometers are
generally considered to have the lowest detection limits of
all mass spectrometers. However, for the monitoring of a
single m/z rather than a full mass spectrum, the use of SIM
mode with a quadrupole MS provides superior sensitivity.
Improved resolution is an additional beneﬁt conferred by
OA-TOF-MS. Although a complete explanation is beyond the
scope of this chapter, in brief, orthogonal acceleration
reduces the resolution-degrading effects that would normally
accompany the kinetic energy variations of individual ions in
the ion beam.
Use of an ion mirror is another technique often employed
in TOF-MS design to improve resolution by compensating
for kinetic energy variations.42,43 Such instruments are
known as reﬂectrons. To date, TOF-MS has had a limited
impact in clinical chemistry with only a few commercially
offered TOF-MS assays, such as insulin-like growth factor
I44,45 and drug screening,46 but it could potentially play a
greater role in the future. For example, full-spectrum
capability, high resolution (up to 40,000 in some current
instruments), high speed (10 to 100 stored spectra per
second), and high mass accuracy of TOF-MS seem ideally
suited to applications such as high-speed drug screens in
toxicology when combined with fast chromatographic sample
introduction.
Another area in which TOF-MS provides an advantage is
high-mass analysis, where its mass range is nearly unlimited.
In MALDI-TOF, for example, it is not unusual to detect
proteins with molecular weights exceeding 100,000 (see

46

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

Chapter 4). The ability for high-mass analysis is expected to
increase in importance as clinical laboratories embrace
proteomic-based diagnostic methods.
Trapping Mass Spectrometers. In contrast to beam-type
designs, these mass spectrometers are based on the trapping
of ions to capture and hold ions for an extended length of
time in a small region of space. Trapping times vary from a
fraction of a second to minutes. Compared with beam-type
instruments, the division between scanning and nonscanning
instruments has less meaning for ion-trapping instruments.
The main practical difference between scanning and
nonscanning instruments is related to distortions in
chromatographic peak shape (or peak skewing). These arise
from the ﬁnite scan time of a mass spectrometer relative to
the time-scale of the width of a chromatographic peak. The
result is that the abundances of the peaks in mass spectra
collected during the rising or falling portions of a
chromatographic peak are distorted relative to the true mass
spectrum. In other words, as an instrument collects a mass
spectrum, scanning from low m/z to high m/z, the peak
intensities observed for low m/z will reﬂect the concentration
of analyte that elutes earlier than the concentration of
analyte that elutes when detecting high m/z. As a result,
mass spectra collected at the beginning of a chromatographic peak may have different relative peak intensities
compared with those of spectra collected at the end of a
chromatographic peak. In terms of producing skewed
spectra, trapping devices are more similar to nonscanning
instruments, such as TOF (does not cause skewing), than to
scanning instruments. This is because the sample is captured
in an instant and then analyzed at leisure. Because the
sample is captured in an instant, no skewing of the spectra
occurs, regardless of whether the mass analysis is performed
by a scanning or a nonscanning technique.
Traditionally, ion traps have been classiﬁed as (1) a QIT,
which relies on RF ﬁelds to provide ion trapping; (2) a linear
ion trap, which is closely related to the QIT in its operating
principles; (3) an ion cyclotron resonance (ICR) mass spectrometer, which relies on a combination of magnetic ﬁelds
and electrostatic ﬁelds for trapping, and (4) an orbitrap, a
more recent introduction into the ﬁeld of ion trap MS.47
Quadrupole Ion Trap. QITs are relatively compact,
inexpensive, and versatile instruments that are excellent
for (1) exploratory studies, (2) structural characterization,
and (3) qualitative identiﬁcation. They are also used for
quantitative analysis, although precision of measurements is
inferior when compared with quadrupole-based instruments.
Operation of the QIT is based on the same physical
principle as the quadrupole mass spectrometer described
earlier. Both devices make use of the ability of RF ﬁelds to
conﬁne ions. However, the RF ﬁeld of an ion trap is designed
to trap ions in three dimensions rather than to allow the ions
to pass through as in a QMF, which conﬁnes ions in two dimensions. This difference has a large impact on the operation
and limitations of the QIT.
The physical arrangement of a QIT is different from that
of a QMF. If an imaginary axis is drawn through the y-axis
of the quadrupole rods, and the rods are rotated around
the axis, a solid ring with a hyperbolic inner surface results
from the x-axis pair of rods. The two y-axis rods form two
solid end caps. A diagram of an ion trap is given in

Figure 2.15. The description of the ﬁelds within the electrodes
must now include a radial component and an axial (between
the end caps) component. These design features have an
effect on the conditions required for ion conﬁnement when
compared with a QMF, although the qualitative description
of ion conﬁnement discussed previously is valid.
A discussion of the several types of scanning experiments
in QIT is beyond the scope of this chapter, except to mention
that ions may be ejected from the trap in an m/z-dependent
fashion for detection using an external electron multiplier.
Some advantages of QITs are an ability to perform
multiple stages of tandem MS (MSn), high sensitivity, and
decoupling of the mass analysis from scanning, so no mass
spectral peak skewing is seen in GC-MS and HPLC-MS.
However, ion-ion repulsion effects (caused by large numbers
of similarly charged species in a small space within the trap)
limit the number of ions that can be trapped, simultaneously
reducing dynamic range and producing mass misassignments at high signal levels. The previously mentioned
features make QITs not well suited for quantitative analyses,
which are typically required for majority of applications in
clinical laboratories.
Linear Ion Trap. The linear trap is an RF ion trap that is
based on a modiﬁed linear QMF. Rather than being a
pass-through device, as in a traditional linear QMF,
electrostatic ﬁelds are applied to the ends to prevent ions
from exiting out the ends of the device. When trapped in
this manner, ions can be manipulated in many of the same
ways as in a QIT. An advantage of the linear quadrupole
ion trap is that the trapping ﬁeld can be turned off at will
and the device operated as a normal QMF. Furthermore the
trapping volume available within the QMF is much greater
than the traditional QIT, allowing greater capacity of the
ions to be trapped before ion-ion repulsion becomes an
issue. Thus a single device combines most of the features of a
QIT and QMF and is extremely versatile. Commercial
triple quadrupole mass spectrometers are being offered in
End cap electrode
(electron entrance)

Hyperbolic
surfaces

Ring
electrode

z
r

End cap electrode
(ion exit)

FIGURE 2.15 Diagram of quadrupole ion trap. r, Radial direction;
z, axial direction.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
which the third quadrupole is modiﬁed to function either as a
linear trap or as a conventional third quadrupole mass
spectrometer as selected by the user.
Ion Cyclotron Resonance. The ICR-MS excels in highresolution and high mass accuracy measurements.48 Measurements at resolution exceeding 1 million are not unusual.
ICR is a trapping technique that shares many of the advantages of RF ion traps (QIT or linear ion traps). However, there
are even more ways to manipulate ions in an ICR-MS than in
RF ion traps, and MSn (multiple stages of MS/MS) measurements are easily done with an ICR-MS. Sensitivity of an
ICR-MS is generally high. Furthermore, sampling is decoupled from spectral acquisition, so no peak skewing is seen in
chromatographic experimentsda feature that ICR shares
with TOF and QIT, and the signal acquisition times are
typically longer than for other types of mass analyzers.
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonanceemass spectrometry (ICR-MS) is based on the principle that ions
immersed in a magnetic ﬁeld undergo circular motion
(cyclotron motion). A typical ICR-MS uses a high-ﬁeld (3
to 12 tesla) superconducting magnet. Within this ﬁeld and
within a high vacuum is mounted a cell typically composed
of six metal electrodes, arranged as the faces of a cube. Ions
are suspended inside the cell and undergo cyclotron motion,
which keeps ions from being lost radially (the radial direction
being deﬁned as perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld lines). A
low (w1 V) potential is applied to the end caps to keep ions
from leaving the trap axially. Thus the combination of electric
and magnetic ﬁelds keeps ions conﬁned within the cell.
Ions circulating in the ICR cell induce an electrical current
in two parallel detection electrodes. The detection electrodes
are on opposite sides of the ICR cell and are arranged parallel
to the magnetic ﬁeld. After certain mathematical operations
are performed on the signal (principally a Fourier transform
[FT]), a mass spectrum is recovered. Each m/z is associated
with a speciﬁc cyclotron frequency, and each m/z value that
is present in the sample produces a peak in the transformed
signal. Because of the frequent use of FT in ICR, the
technique is often referred to as FT-ICR or FTMS.
Although this technique has many advantages, including
(1) high mass accuracy, (2) ultra-high resolution, and (3) the
ability to perform MSn, ICR-MS has several disadvantages,
including (1) high instrument costs; (2) very demanding site
requirements, in terms of both space and access restrictions;
(3) requirement for a high-ﬁeld superconducting magnet;
(4) relatively long signal acquisition time, which limits the
number of scans that can be acquired during the elution of a
chromatographic peak; (5) safety concerns related to high
magnetic ﬁelds; (6) demagnetization of credit cards and other
magnetically encoded strips; (7) high costs of operation and
maintenance because the instruments consume liquid helium
and must never be allowed to run out of helium; and (8) necessity of a highly skilled individual to operate the instrument.
Orbitrap. The suitability of a new type of mass analyzer,
the orbitrap, for clinical analysis has yet to be proved.
However, the high resolution and mass accuracy of the
orbitrap suggest that it has potential for use in clinical
laboratories. The orbitrap mass analyzer has resolution and
mass accuracy approaching that of an ICR mass spectrometer
but does not require a magnetic ﬁeld. This innovation
minimizes many of the ICR disadvantages listed previously.

47

The principles of mass analysis in an orbitrap are based on
an early ion storage devicedthe Kingdon trap.49 After many
variations over the years, Makarov and associates47,50-52
developed a modiﬁed version that was commercialized
in 2006. The commercial instrument can easily achieve
resolutions up to 100,000 and parts per million or even sube
parts per million mass accuracy, has four orders of magnitude
dynamic range, and has sampling decoupled from spectral
acquisition (as in the ICR). The resolution and mass accuracy
are typically approximately 2 orders of magnitude greater
than with a quadrupole mass spectrometer.
Orbitrap-MS is based on trapping within electrostatic
ﬁelds.53 The actual device is a spindle-like central electrode
surrounded by a barrel-like outer electrode.54 When ions
are introduced perpendicular to the central electrode and a
radial potential is applied between electrodes, the ions spiral
(orbit) around the central electrode and are effectively trapped in a radial direction. Trapping in the axial direction is
assisted by the shape of the electrodes, together with the potentials that are applied to the electrodes. Ion trapping therefore involves both orbital motion around the central electrode
and axial oscillations.
The trapping potential in the axial direction is of the form
of a harmonic oscillator, and because the frequency of a
harmonic oscillator is independent of oscillation amplitude,
this frequency is very stable and well behaved. The m/z can
be calculated from the frequency of axial oscillation:
u ¼ 2pf ¼ ðkm=zÞ1=2
where u is angular velocity, f is frequency, m/z is the mass-tocharge ratio, and k is a constant determined by the trap
geometry, dimensions, and applied potential. (To be dimensionally correct, m/z in this equation must have units of
mass divided by charge, which differs from the currently
accepted deﬁnition of m/z as a unitless number31 (see also
http://goldbook.iupac.org/M03752.html).
The image current (current induced by a motion of ions
passing near a conductor) made in the outer electrode
induced by the ion motion is acquired in the time domain
and can be Fourier-transformed to produce a frequency
spectrum that is then converted to m/z using the previous
equation.
With the ability to perform accurate mass measurements,
especially when combined with a linear ion trap or quadrupole to form a hybrid tandem mass spectrometer, orbitrap
mass analyzers have excellent capabilities for proteomics
research. One recent publication noted anomalous isotope
ratios observed under high-resolution operating conditions.55 It is a curious point that the anomalies are
compound-dependent, and generally increase with increasing
resolution. A theoretical explanation for these anomalies has
been given.56

Tandem Mass Spectrometers
Tandem MS, or MS/MS, has become the dominant MS-based
technique used in clinical laboratories, where it has found
extensive application in the quantitative analysis of routine
samples.57 However, it is also a useful technique for structural
characterization and compound identiﬁcation and therefore

48

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

often used for exploratory work. The most important features
of this technique are its very high selectivity, ability to
measure very low concentrations of analyte(s), and ability
to multiplex the measurement of multiple analytes in a single
method. Susceptibility of MS/MS to interferences is typically
very low, especially if MS/MS is combined with chromatographic separation. The reason is that a detected compound
is separated and characterized by three physical properties:
chromatographic retention time, precursor ion mass, and
product ion mass. Because of its high speciﬁcity, low
consumable cost, and a potentially high sample throughput,
increasingly more clinical laboratories are using tandem
mass spectrometers for the routine analysis of samples.
The physical principle of MS/MS is based on the use of two
mass spectrometers (or mass ﬁlters) arranged sequentially in
tandem, with a collision cell placed between the two mass
ﬁlters. The ﬁrst ﬁlter is used to select a precursor ion of a
particular m/z. The precursor ion is directed into the collision
cell, where ions collide with background gas molecules and
are broken into smaller product ions. The second mass ﬁlter
acquires the mass spectrum of the product ions.
A variety of scan functions are possible with MS/MS. A
product ion scan involves setting the ﬁrst mass spectrometer
(also called mass ﬁlter 1, MF1, MF1, MS1, or Q1) to select a
given m/z, and scanning through the full mass spectrum of
product ions using the second mass spectrometer or mass
ﬁlter, MF2. This scan function is often used for structural
characterization.
A precursor ion scan reverses this relationship, with the
second mass ﬁlter, MF2, set to select a speciﬁc product ion,
and MF1 is scanned through the spectrum of precursor
ions. The scan tells which precursor ions produce a speciﬁc
product ionda capability that is often used to analyze for
speciﬁc classes of compounds. For example, acylcarnitines
are often analyzed using precursor ion scan mode by
acquiring signal from all the precursors of the m/z 85.
In a constant neutral loss scan, the two mass ﬁlters are
scanned synchronously, with a constant m/z offset between
precursor and product ion. This scan indicates which ions
lose a particular neutral fragment. For example, an offset of
176 m/z units would select for ions losing a glucuronide
moiety in the dissociation process.
The most commonly used scan function in MS/MS is
MRM (also referred as SRM). In this type of acquisition a
series of precursor/product ion pairs are monitored, with
the mass spectrometer set to step through the table of
parent/product ion pairs in a cyclic fashion. MRM acquisition
is primarily used for quantitative analysis of target compounds and is an analog to the SIM type of acquisition
used in GC-MS.
As with single-stage mass spectrometers, MS/MS are
roughly categorized as beam-type instruments and trapping
instruments. The most popular beam-type instrument is
the triple quadrupole. In this instrument, the ﬁrst quadrupole
(Q1) functions as MF1 and the third quadrupole (Q3)
functions as MF2. Between these two quadrupoles is another
quadrupole, Q2, which functions as the collision cell. The
pressure is raised in Q2 (eg, >103 torr) by the addition of
a nonreactive gas (nitrogen, helium, argon, etc.) to the point
that ions traversing Q2 undergo multiple collisions, leading
to deposition of energy onto the analyte and subsequent

fragmentation of the precursor ion(s) into smaller fragments,
followed by separation and detection of the product ions in a
subsequent stage of mass analysis. The Q2 is operated as an
RF-only quadrupole, ideally passing all ions regardless of
m/z. The technique is typically used to fragment molecular
or pseudomolecular ions in order to obtain analyte-speciﬁc
fragments, which can be used for elucidating structure of
the molecules of interest or in selective analysis of targeted
molecules. In cases in which the collision-induced
dissociation spectrum contains a large number of ions, the
experienced investigator often can deduce the structure of a
molecule from the mass spectrum of the product ion.
Two magnetic sector instruments also have been operated
in tandem, with a collision cell placed between the two mass
analyzers. These instruments permit high-resolution
selection of both precursor and product ions. However,
they are now rarely used because of the high cost and
cumbersome operation. A single magnetic sector mass
spectrometer (in the form of a double focusing mass
spectrometer) has also been used as an MS/MS by a technique
known as linked scanning. A product ion scan by linked
scanning involves low resolution for the ﬁrst m/z selection
and high resolution for the second m/z selection.
Hybrid mass spectrometers include a combination of two
different types of mass spectrometers in a tandem arrangement. The combination of a magnetic sector mass spectrometer with a quadrupole mass spectrometer was an early
instrument of this type. More popular today is the
combination of a quadrupole for the ﬁrst stage of m/z
selection and a TOF for the second m/z analyzer.
Subsequently, linear ion trap and quadrupole mass analyzers
have been combined with an orbitrap. Hybrid instruments
are presently used mainly for proteomics research. These
instruments cannot perform the true precursor ion scans or
constant neutral loss scans, though it is possible to mimic
these functions by postprocessing data, provided the full
precursor-product ion map was generated in the experiment.
QIT, linear ion trap, and ICR mass spectrometers also can
be used as MS/MS. Unlike beam-type instruments, which are
referred to as “tandem in space,” trapping mass spectrometers
are “tandem in time,” meaning that ions are held in one
region of space while the parent ion is selected and
dissociated and the daughter ion is analyzed sequentially in
time in the same region of space. The ability to perform
MS/MS is inherent in the design of most trapping mass
spectrometers. Generally, little or no additional hardware is
required, and tandem capability is supplied via software. An
exception is the orbitrap, which is not amenable to MS/MS
when used alone. However, when incorporated into a hybrid
instrument, with a different type of mass spectrometer
supplying the ﬁrst stage of MS (such as a linear ion trap or
a quadrupole), and with the orbitrap providing the ﬁnal
stage of MS, MS/MS is possible in an orbitrap-based
instrument.
Most trap-based instruments are capable of multiple
stages of MS. Thus, product ions may be further dissociated
to produce another generation of product ions (MS/MS/MS,
or MS3). In principle, any number of dissociation stages
may be performed (MSn). This capability ﬁnds its greatest
use in structural characterization, such as in the sequencing
of peptides, and is less useful for quantitative analysis.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
MF1

Collision cell

A
B
C

A

MF2

A1
gas

49

A2

A1
B1

A3

Targeted MRM

C1

Targeted MRM

A1
A

gas

A2

A1

A3

B

Static

Static

A
B

A1⫹X
gas

C

C

C1⫹X

Scan

Static

A
B

A1⫹X
gas

C

D

X

B1⫹X

A1

B1⫹X

B1

C1⫹X

C1

Scan

Scan

FIGURE 2.16 Scan modes in mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry (MS/MS). A, Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM), in
which A, B, C, A1, B1, and C1 are ions. Monitoring of MS/MS transitions A / A1, B / B1, and B / C1 is multiplexed. For
simplicity, only the dissociation of A is shown in a collision cell in the ﬁgure. B, MRM of a single compound, where only one
MS/MS transition is monitored. C, Precursor ion scan, in which A, B, C, and X are all ions. The second mass ﬁlter (MF2) is
ﬁxed to monitor the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) corresponding to ionic species X, and the ﬁrst mass ﬁlter (MF1) is scanned
through a range of m/z values. D, Constant neutral loss scan, in which X is uncharged and A, B, C, A1, B1, and C1 are ions.
The two mass ﬁlters are scanned with a constant m/z offset between the two corresponding to the mass of X.

Although trapping designs are extremely versatile (such as
allowing multiple stages of fragmentation), these instruments are unable to perform true precursor ion scans or
constant neutral loss scans, as illustrated in Figure 2.16,
C and D, respectively. However, it is possible to simulate
the effect of precursor ion scans or constant neutral loss
scans by taking a series of product ion scans, one for each
possible parent ion m/z. This will generate a complete MS/
MS map. From this complete map data can be selected to
simulate these two scan modes because a precursor ion scan
is just a subset of the complete MS/MS map, as is a constant
neutral loss scan. However, this procedure can be quite
time-consuming, which would make it impractical in some
applications.

Ion Mobility
Although strictly speaking, ion mobility spectrometers (IMS)
are not mass analyzers, they are nevertheless often included
as part of the ﬁeld of MS, either as part of a hyphenated
technique (eg, IMS-MS) or as a substitute for an MS
analyzer.58-60 Ion mobility spectrometers are like mass
spectrometers in the sense that they require the analyte to
be ionized, but the separation mechanism is different. Rather
than separating ions by their mass-to-charge ratio, ions are
separated according to their mobility in an electric ﬁeld.
Thus ion mobility can be regarded in some respects as a
form of gas phase electrophoresis.
The simpliﬁed schematic of a conventional ion mobility
spectrometer strongly resembles a TOF-MS, but rather than

50

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

following a collisionless trajectory, ions undergo many
collisions as they drift under the inﬂuence of an electric ﬁeld.
Other conﬁgurations for measuring gas phase mobility are
also possible,58-60 but these will not be reviewed in detail here.
An IMS may operate at atmospheric pressure or at reduced
pressure but not under a high vacuum because collisions are
necessary for its operation. When used in conjunction with a
mass spectrometer it is possible to place the mobility device
before the ﬁrst mass analyzer or following one or more stage
of mass analysis.
A technique known as ﬁeld asymmetric ion mobility
spectrometry (FAIMS) is also based on ion mobility, but in
this case ions are not separated strictly according to their
mobility. FAIMS, sometimes known as differential mobility
spectrometry (DMS), is based on the fact that the mobility
of a gas phase ion is not strictly constant; that is, the drift
velocity is not simply proportional to the electric ﬁeld, but
rather at high ﬁeld there is a deviation from the proportional
relationship. FAIMS uses a combination of an asymmetrical
high-voltage RF ﬁeld and a smaller DC ﬁeld to separate
ions according to a combination of low-ﬁeld mobility and
high-ﬁeld mobility. FAIMS is beginning to ﬁnd applications
in clinical MS when used as a ﬁltering device positioned
between the ion source and the mass analyzer.61
IMS also has been used alone for clinical applications,
without being combined with MS. Notably, it has been used
to separate unmodiﬁed lipoproteins on the basis of size using
a differential mobility analyzer (DMA, not to be confused
with DMS). The instrument conﬁguration differs from a
conventional drift tube IMS, but like a drift tube IMS (and
unlike FAIMS), the physical property being measured is gas
phase ion mobility. After the separation, each lipoprotein
particle is directly detected and counted as it exits the separation chamber, and the lipoprotein subfraction categorization is
made based on the mobility of the particles.62-64

Detectors
With the exception of ICR-MS, orbitrap, and some ICP-MS
instruments, most modern mass spectrometers use electron
multipliers for ion detection. The main classes of electron
multipliers used as MS detectors include the (1) discrete
dynode multipliers; (2) continuous dynode electron
multipliers (CDEMs), also known as channel electron multipliers; and (3) microchannel plate electron multipliers, also
known as multichannel plate electron multipliers. Although
different in design, all three work on the same physical principle. Additional types of detectors used in mass spectrometers are the Faraday cup, image current detection, and
photomultipliers.
Figure 2.17 presents a conceptual diagram of the operation
of a discrete dynode electron multiplier. When an ion strikes
the ﬁrst dynode, it causes the ejection of one or more
electrons (secondary electrons) from the dynode surface.
The electron is accelerated toward the second dynode by a
voltage difference of approximately 100 V. On striking the
second dynode, this electron causes the ejection of additional
electrons, typically 2 or 3. The second group of electrons is
then accelerated toward the third dynode and, on striking
the third dynode, causes the ejection of several more
electrons. This process is repeated through a chain of
dynodes, numbering between 12 and 24 for most designs.
The cascade process typically produces a gain of 104 to 108,

Ion

Dynodes
Electron
cascade

Anode

FIGURE 2.17 Discrete dynode electron multiplier showing
dynode structure and generation of electron cascade.

meaning that one ion striking the ﬁrst electrode produces a
pulse of 104 to 108 electrons at the end of the cascade. The
duration of the pulse is very short, typically less than 10 ns.
A CDEM works on the same principle as a discrete dynode
electron multiplier but differs in design. The set of dynodes of
a discrete dynode electron multiplier is replaced by a single
continuous resistive surface that acts both as a (continuous)
voltage divider to establish the potential gradient and as
the secondary electron-generating surface. A microchannel
plate electron multiplier is essentially a monolithic array
of miniaturized CDEMs fabricated in a single wafer or
disk of glass. Sometimes these are stacked into a chevron
conﬁguration for added gain.
The Faraday cup is not an electron-multiplying device, but
rather a simple electrode that intercepts the ion beam directly.
This current is ampliﬁed using electronic ampliﬁers. Because
the Faraday cup measures signal intensity directly, rather than
indirectly (as in saturation-prone electron multipliers), it
provides an absolute measure of ion current and is useful
when the magnitude of the signal is too high for electron
multiplierebased detection. Some instruments use both
electron multiplier and Faraday cupebased detection to
provide extended dynamic rangeda capability that is
especially useful for elemental analysis of trace and toxic
elements by ICP-MS.
Detection in ICR occurs via image current detection. This
is closely related to the Faraday detection cup in the sense that
the ion current is detected directly. However, ions are not
destroyed in the process of image current detection and are
available for remeasurement. This feature is one of the keys
to the versatility of ICR mass spectrometers. Image current
detection is also used in the orbitrap.
Closely linked to the detection system is the electronic and
signal processing system. In instruments that use electron
multiplier detection (the vast majority of mass spectrometers), the raw signal from the detector is processed in
one of two ways: (1) individual pulses (corresponding to
individual ions) may be counted, as in ion counting systems,
or (2) the signal may be converted to a digital representation
of the analog signal using an analog-to-digital converter, as in
analog detection.

Computer and Software
Because of their (1) mass resolution capabilities, (2) scanning
functions, (3) ability to automatically switch between positive

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
to negative ionization modes, and (4) speed with which multiple
m/z signals are acquired, modern MS instruments generate
enormous quantities of raw data. In addition, the use of MS
in such areas as (1) proteomics, (2) biomarker discovery, (3)
synthetic combinatorial chemistry, (4) high-throughput drug
discovery, (5) pharmacogenomics, (6) toxicology, and (7)
therapeutic drug monitoring requires that MS manufacturers
provide powerful computers and software.
In toxicology laboratories, one important function of the
data system is library searching to assist in compound
identiﬁcation. Several commercial libraries, including the
Wiley Registry of Mass Spectral Data; the NIST Mass Spectral
Database; and the Pﬂeger, Maurer, and Weber drug libraries,
are available. In addition, many laboratories generate their
own libraries. The quality and number of available spectra,
the search algorithm, and whether condensed or full spectra
are searched are all important factors in spectral matching.
In proteomics and biomarker discovery, complex mass
spectra from single proteins, protein mixtures, or protein
digests corresponding to complex samples are obtained. Data
systems aid in characterization of spectral data to identify
such properties as intact protein mass, amino acid subsequences, and posttranslational modiﬁcations. Fragmentation
information also can be compared with peptide databases to
identify structural mutations that may be present.
The most important function of software in MS systems is
data collection and processing. Chromatographic peaks are
integrated using data analysis software, and integrated peak
intensities or peak areas serve as the basis for quantitative
analysis. Calibration curves are generated during data
processing, and quantitative results from individual samples
are generated using the calibration curves; the data systems
also contain report generation capabilities.
Deconvolution protocols have been developed that
identify and characterize the mass spectra corresponding to
the coeluting peaks. In addition to proprietary deconvolution
protocols embedded in the data systems of mass spectrometers supplied by some vendors, there is a freely available
deconvolution software program known as AMDIS.65

CLINICAL APPLICATIONS
Mass spectrometers coupled with gas or liquid chromatographs (GC-MS or LC-MS) serve as versatile analytical
instruments that combine the resolving power of a
chromatograph with the speciﬁcity of a mass spectrometer.66
Such instruments are powerful analytical tools that are used
by clinical laboratories to identify and quantify biomolecules.
The instruments are capable of providing structural and
quantitative information in real time on individual analytes
as they elute from a chromatographic column. Speciﬁc
applications of these coupled instruments can be found in
Chapters 5 and 6.

Gas ChromatographyeMass Spectrometry
GC-MS has been used for the analysis of biological samples
for several decades. This technique is used by the US National
Institute of Standards and Technology and other agencies for
the development of deﬁnitive methods to qualify standard
reference materials and assign accurate concentration to
reference materials of many clinically relevant analytes,

51

including cholesterol, glucose, steroid hormones, creatinine,
and urea nitrogen.
One of the most common applications of GC-MS is drug
testing for clinical or forensic purposes. Many drugs have
relatively low molecular weight and nonpolar and/or volatile
properties, making these compounds particularly suitable for
analysis by GC. Electron impact ionization with full scan
mass detection is the most widely used approach for comprehensive drug screening. Unknown compounds can be identiﬁed by matching full mass spectrum of unknown peaks with a
mass spectral library or a database. In addition, vendors have
recently introduced GC tandem quadrupole (GC-MS/MS)
mass spectrometers, which should expand the capability of
GC-MS to perform improved targeted and untargeted analysis, thus enhancing existing screening and mass spectral
identiﬁcation capabilities of GC-MS.
GC-MS has many applications beyond drug testing.
Numerous xenobiotic compounds are readily analyzed by
GC-MS. Applications for anabolic steroids, pesticides,
pollutants, and inborn errors of metabolism have been
described.67-69
One important limitation to GC-MS is the requirement
that compounds be sufﬁciently volatile to allow transfer
from the liquid phase to the mobile carrier gas and thus to
elute from the analytical column to the detector. Although
many biologic compounds are amenable to chromatographic
separation with GC, numerous other compounds are too
polar or too large to be analyzed with this technique. In
many cases, chemical derivatization is necessary to create
sufﬁciently volatile forms of compounds. Knapp’s classic
work on derivatization70 may be consulted for more
information.
Despite its limitations, GC-MS has several positive attributes.
High-efﬁciency separations have been achieved with numerous
commercial capillary columns. This technique allows achieving
high-efﬁciency chromatographic separation and excellent
limits of quantiﬁcation, and it allows use of commercial
mass spectral libraries for identiﬁcation of sample constituents. For some of the analytes, such as organic acids, GCMS has advantages of higher speciﬁcity compared to soft
ionization techniques used in LC-MS.

Liquid ChromatographyeMass Spectrometry
As discussed earlier, several interface techniques have been
developed for coupling a liquid chromatograph to a mass
spectrometer, notably ESI and APCI, which have allowed
LC-MS and LC-MS/MS to be successfully applied to analysis
of a wide range of compounds. In theory, as long as a
compound can be dissolved in a liquid, it can be introduced
into an LC-MS system. Thus, in addition to low molecular
weight polar and nonpolar analytes, large molecular weight
compounds, such as proteins, can be analyzed using this
technique (see Chapter 6).
LC-MS/MS has gained momentum in the arena of
toxicology screening and conﬁrmation.71-73 A majority of
the currently used methods for targeted analysis use MRM
acquisition using mass transitions corresponding to drugs
of interest (see Fig. 2.16, A). For example, within the
chromatographic time window of 1.0 to 2.0 minutes, the
MRM transitions for selected sympathomimetic amines
might be monitored. During the next deﬁned time window,

52

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

a new set of MRM transitions are monitored and so on for the
rest of the chromatographic run. A related approach is the use
of targeted MRM, in which recognition of a chromatographic
peak containing a preselected MRM transition triggers a
product ion scan in a process called information-dependent
acquisition, also known as data-dependent acquisition. One
beneﬁt of this approach is the ability to provide conﬁrmation
of the identity of the peaks identiﬁed during the analysis.
Coupling of TOF-MS to GC or LC provides a new
approach to the identiﬁcation of unknowns.46,74 Because
TOF is capable of achieving high mass resolution and high
sensitivity, the need for compound fragmentation may be
minimized, allowing compound identiﬁcation based on
retention time and accurate mass.75
The number of quantitative LC-MS/MS assays introduced
for the measurement of clinically important compounds has
markedly increased. For example, a few compounds that have
been of special interest include (1) immunosuppressant
drugs,76 (2) biogenic amines,77 (3) 25(OH)-vitamin D,78
(4) antiretroviral drugs,79,80 (5) psychoactive drugs,81-83 (6)
methylmalonic acid,84,85 (7) thyroid hormones,86 and (8)
steroids.87,88 When quantiﬁcation of a speciﬁc compound is
desired, the most effective approach is MRM analysis (see
Fig. 2.16, B). With MRM acquisition, both mass ﬁlters MF1
and MF2 are set in a static mode, whereby only precursor
ions speciﬁc for the compound and the internal standard
being measured are passed through MF1. This preselected
precursor ion is then fragmented in the collision cell, and
molecule-speciﬁc fragment ions derived from the compound
of interest are passed by MF2 to the detector. Because only
one ion is monitored in MF1 and typically two moleculespeciﬁc fragment ions monitored in MF2, as opposed to
scanning for multiple ions, the MRM approach allows
much greater speciﬁcity as well as lower limits of
quantiﬁcation.
Another area in which MS/MS is used clinically is
screening and conﬁrmation of genetic disorders and inborn
errors of metabolism.89,90 The ability to analyze multiple
compounds in a single analytical run makes this technique
an efﬁcient tool for screening purposes. In this application,
in some cases MS/MS is of sufﬁcient selectivity to eliminate
the need to incorporate LC separation, a simpliﬁcation that
allows high-throughput analysis.
Electrospray-MS/MS is also used for carnitine and
acylcarnitine analysis to detect organic acidemias and fatty
acid oxidation defects.91,92 In the methods for acylcarnitine
and amino acid analysis, these compounds vary widely in
their polarity, which creates problems with consistency of
response factors. To address this issue, most methods use a
butyl ester derivatization of the carboxyl group to force
cationic character on the amino acids and thus enhance the
ionization efﬁciency.93
Acylcarnitines can be analyzed without derivatization,94
but most often are analyzed as butyl esters using a precursor
ion scan mode of acquisition (see Fig. 2.16, C).95,96 This
type of acquisition makes use of the fact that acylcarnitines
have a common collision-induced m/z 85 product ion
(represented by X in Fig. 2.16, C) that is selectively monitored
in MF2. MF1 is set to scan for precursors with m/z 85, thus
detecting and identifying acylcarnitines present in the sample
(see Fig. 2.16, C). By incorporating in the method stable
isotope-labeled analogs of the targeted acetylcarnitines,

it is possible in addition to identiﬁcation, to establish
concentration of the acylcarnitines of interest.
Analysis of amino acids by LC-MS/MS is typically
performed using traditional MRM monitoring but also can
be performed using a data acquisition mode known as
constant neutral loss (see Fig. 2.16, D).88 Butyl derivatives of
a-amino acids share a common neutral product, butylformate,
which has a mass of 102 Da (represented by X in Fig. 2.16, D).
By scanning for both product (MF2) and precursor (MF1)
ions, and by keeping a constant offset between the two mass
m/z analyzers (eg, a difference of 102 m/z units), any m/z
differences that equal 102 Da can be used to detect and identify
amino acids present in the samples.
One advantage of LC-MS/MS relative to GC-MS is that in
many cases it allows avoidance of derivatization of the target
compounds, but in some cases derivatization is useful for
LC-MS/MS as well. An example of butyl ester derivatization
was discussed previously. In this example, the derivative has
more favorable fragmentation properties than the underivatized compounds. Similarly, the dibutyl ester of methylmalonic acid (MMA), when run in positive ion mode ESI, has
more favorable MS/MS spectra than the underivatized
compound run in negative ion mode ESI; in addition, the
dibutyl esters of dicarboxylic acids are selectively ionized in
positive ion mode ESI, whereas monocarboxylic organic acids
are not efﬁciently ionized and are therefore not detected by
the mass spectrometer.84 By using MMA extraction at
conditions speciﬁc for acidic compounds and detection
speciﬁc for polycarboxylic acids, it is possible to perform
the LC-MS/MS analysis using isocratic chromatographic
separation without the need for reconditioning and reequilibration of the chromatographic column between injections.84
The most frequent reason for using derivatization in LCMS and LC-MS/MS is to achieve improved ionization
efﬁciency. Gao and colleagues97 have emphasized this issue
in an extensive discussion of derivatization in ESI and
APCI MS.
Product ion scan is another mode of acquisition using MS/
MS; in this scan mode, the ﬁrst mass ﬁlter is ﬁxed to pass a
speciﬁc m/z and the second mass ﬁlter is scanned over a
speciﬁed range of m/z values. Product ion scan mode is
very useful for structural elucidation, such as in peptide
sequencing, but is less useful for routine quantitative analysis.

Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Mass
Spectrometry
MALDI (typically coupled with a TOF analyzer) has been
used to analyze many different classes of compounds.
Notably, it has been widely applied in discovery applications for the detection and identiﬁcation of proteins and
peptides (see Chapter 6). Primary limitations include
high background noise and a higher coefﬁcient of variation
that seems inherent in the MALDI ionization process. In
addition, MALDI is essentially a batch-type process that
does not interface naturally with online separation processes using chromatographic techniques (eg, HPLC, capillary electrophoresis).
MALDI-TOF is often used to determine the identity of
proteins through peptide mass ﬁngerprinting. This technique
has been used to identify a large number of two-dimensional
(2D) gel spots for the bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
Spec #1⇒BC[BP ⫽ 2139.0, 23588]
2109.0288

24E⫹4

1130.5045
2315.0525
1272.6083
951.4523
1002.5003
873.3013

1585.5718
1854.8123

2006.0060
2380.0219
2154.9903
2332.0246

2187.6

1824.7935
1871.6569

1956.2

1524.8

1193.4

1588.6681

2519.0

1606.8390

1303.7149
1033.5130
1159.5825
1005.5340

862.0

% Intensity

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Mass (m/z)

FIGURE 2.18 Example of a matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionizationetime-of-ﬂight spectrum showing peptides generated
in a tryptic digest of a spot cored from a two-dimensional
sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The
16 most abundant m/z values were submitted to the MS-Fit
database for searching against the nonredundant database. The
results for this search are shown in Table 2.1.

aeruginosa.98 The procedure generally involves in-gel tryptic
digestion followed by accurate mass measurement of the
peptides produced during the digestion. The generated
mass list is then compared with theoretical tryptic masses
for proteins in a database (Fig. 2.18 and Table 2.1). This
procedure, which works best for organisms with complete

53

and annotated genomes, is very rapid because 100 or more
samples may be deposited on a single MALDI target plate
and automatically processed. In the previous example,98 the
group rapidly identiﬁed a large number of proteins that
were expressed differently among the studied bacteria. In
addition, it was found that some proteins were listed as
“hypothetical,” meaning they were previously undescribed
or conﬁrmed to be expressed, and that the theoretical
molecular weight and/or isoelectric point (pI) in some cases
were different from those measured in the gel, indicating
possible loss of terminal amino acids and/or posttranslational
modiﬁcations.
One clinical application of MALDI-TOF that has proved
its clinical utility is identiﬁcation of microorganisms
(discussed in more depth in Chapter 4). Identiﬁcation of
the bacteria is performed by ﬁngerprinting proteins and
peptides extracted from cultures using gentle conditions.99
The basis of this technique is that different bacteria express
unique mixtures of proteins and peptides; when samples are
analyzed using MALDI-TOF, the bacteria-speciﬁc mass
spectra are observed in the 2- to 20-kDa mass range,
allowing database searching and classiﬁcation based on the
protein mass ﬁngerprint. One of the disadvantages99 of the
technique is the lack of actual protein information and
the relative lack of speciﬁcity to different strains of the
same bacteria. The protein mass ﬁngerprints must be catalogued (entered in mass spectral library) for each bacterium
and validated to be speciﬁc and reproducible for a given
extraction method.

TABLE 2.1 Example of Printout of Bacterial Identiﬁcation Through Peptide Mass
Fingerprinting Using Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization MALDI-Time of Flight*

Rank

Mowse
Score

1

1.07eþ008

m/z
Submitted
870.4746
873.3981
951.4901
1002.5385
1033.5513
1130.6349
1130.6349
1159.6039
1272.6508
1303.7573
1585.7190
1606.8861
2138.0756
2315.1093
2388.0671

MHþ
Matched
870.4797
873.3929
951.4900
1002.5373
1033.5543
1130.6322
1130.6322
1159.6071
1272.6483
1303.7599
1585.7215
1606.9029
2138.0704
2315.0951
2388.0731

# (%)
Masses
Matched

Protein
Mw
(Da)/pI

Species

NCBInr.81602
Accession #

Protein Name

14/16
101754.9/ Saccharomyces 6321275
(Z72685) ORF
(87%)
9.15
cerevisiae
YGL163c
1. 14/16 matches (87%). 101754.9 Da, pI ¼ 9.15. Acc. #6321275. Saccharomyces cerevisiae. (Z72685) ORF YGL163c.
Delta ppm
5.8732
5.9793
0.1050
1.2224
2.8793
2.4037
2.4037
2.7957
1.9865
1.9457
1.5602
10.4650
2.4250
6.1321
2.5004

Start
598
774
814
515
46
120
514
56
734
270
446
22
747
401
293

End
606
779
821
522
55
128
522
67
746
280
459
35
765
423
313

Peptide Sequence
(Click for Fragment Ions)
(K) GVGGSQPLR(A)
(K) DCFIYR(F)
(R) LFSSDNLR(Q)
(K) NFENPILR(G)
(K) NTHIPPAAGR(I)
(R) LSHIQYTLR(R)
(R) KNFENPILR(G)
(R) IATGSDNIVGGR(S)
(K) AGGCGINLIGANR(L)
(K) ILRPHQVEGVR(F)
(K) NCNVGLMLADEGHR(L)
(R) LVPRPINVQDSVNR(L)
(R) LILMDPDWNPAADQQALAR(V)
(K) SSMGGGNTTVSQAIHAWAQAQGR(N)
(K) DYLEAEAFNTSSEDPLKSDEK(A)

Modiﬁcations

C2H2O2

C2H2O2
C2H2O2

MHþ, Ion formed by attachment of a proton to molecule M; MOWSE, MOlecular Weight SEarch method; MW, molecular weight; m/z,
mass-to-charge ratio
*
A generated mass list is compared with theoretical tryptic masses for proteins in a database. Match quality is used for pathogen identiﬁcation.

54

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

Some of these drawbacks were addressed in a MALDI
technique that targets ribosomal proteins.100 This technique
was evaluated using 1116 isolates collected in a routine
clinical microbiology laboratory and was described as being
fast, reliable, and easy to use. More than 95% of clinical
isolates were correctly identiﬁed, and most of the previously
incorrectly identiﬁed isolates were assigned to the correct
genus or a closely related genus. Bacterial identiﬁcation
by MALDI MS is rapidly becoming a routine method in
microbiology laboratories.
MALDI MS has the reputation of being a nonquantitative
technique. However, some progress has been made toward its
use as a quantitative technique.101 If this application becomes
routine, it could have major beneﬁts for clinical MS because
the time to acquire a mass spectrum by MALDI is only a few
seconds. This could dramatically improve throughput.
However, it seems likely that this application will require
off-line separation (or sample fractionation) before loading
on the MALDI target, to obtain sufﬁcient selectivity necessary
for clinical applications.

Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry
ICP-MS is used for the determination of trace and toxic
elements in many types of samples (see references 10, 102,
and 103). However, it is known that the toxicity of an element
may depend on the organic or inorganic state in which the
element is present. In these cases, it is more important to
ascertain the concentrations of toxic species rather than the
total concentration of the element. To extend the usefulness
of this technique, GC and HPLC systems have been coupled
to ICP-MS to separate different compounds containing the
targeted element before ICP-MS analysis.104

Proteomics, Genomics, and Metabolomics
The past 20þ years have seen tremendous progress in
genomics, with hundreds of genomes completed or near
completion and many now parsed and annotated. This
information is highly complex, mainly because of the myriad
changes that occur to proteins produced from the genome
throughout the life cycle of a cell, but potentially will provide
a better understanding of the cellular functions and allow
discovery of novel disease biomarkers.105 In the mid-1990s,
MS came to the forefront of analytical techniques used to
study proteins, and the term proteomics was coined. Although
the deﬁnition of proteomics is still debated, for the present
discussion it is taken to encompass knowledge of the
structure, function, and expression of all proteins in the
biochemical or biological contexts of all organism.106 In a
more basic and practical sense, proteomics refers to the
identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of proteins and their
posttranslational modiﬁcations in a given system or systems.
Proteome analysis is a powerful tool for investigating (1)
biomarkers of disease, (2) antigens of pathogens, (3) drug
target proteins, and (4) posttranslational modiﬁcations, as
well as for other investigations. This is a challenging task in
that a given gene may have many distinct chemical protein
isoforms. In addition, many other molecules (metals, lipids,
etc.) interact with proteins in a noncovalent fashion. Therefore in a genome, such as the human genome, a repertoire
of more than a million proteins may require identiﬁcation
and quantiﬁcation. Two foundations are necessary to begin

this daunting challenge. The ﬁrst is the basic sequence
expected for each possible protein in a cell (ie, information
from a completed genome). The second is instrumentation,
which currently consists of advanced mass spectrometers
that identify and quantify protein isoforms in an automated
fashion at very low limits of detection. Both foundations
are now essentially in place. However, the goals previously
stated are far from being reached, and considerable advances
will need to be made in the ﬁeld of systems biology for better
understanding of the biological systems.
Currently, MS is routinely used to accomplish many tasks
in proteomics. The most basic task is protein identiﬁcation.
The typical approach is known as the bottom-up method,
whereby proteins are separateddby gel electrophoresis or
by solution-based methodsdand then digested. The resulting
enzymatic fragments are analyzed and used to identify the
protein(s) present. This process is time-consuming and has
many pitfalls. Increasingly, much research has been devoted
to analysis of mixtures of proteins. These mixtures are
derived from biological ﬂuids, cellular compartments, tissue,
or immunoprecipitation. Currently, both instrumentation
and data analysis software are not sufﬁciently advanced to
allow unambiguous identiﬁcation of all the proteins in highly
complex biological samples. As a result, much emphasis has
been placed on separation methods and enrichment techniques for preparing samples for analysis of proteins and
peptides.
Another approach that was shown to enable sequencing of
intact proteins and posttranslational modiﬁcations is known
as the top-down method. Top-down proteomics involves
identiﬁcation of proteins in complex mixtures without prior
digestion of proteins into peptides. Approaches used for
protein top-down characterization include extraction of the
proteins from samples, fractionation and analysis of the
samples using high-resolution accurate mass MS/MS with
CID, higher energy collision dissociation, and electrontransfer dissociation fragmentation. Main beneﬁts of the
top-down analysis are in the ability to detect in the samples
proteins containing posttranslational modiﬁcations and their
sequence variants.
Many research groups have introduced methods allowing
handling of highly complex biological samples. The most
popular approaches include subcellular fractionation,
multidimensional chromatography, afﬁnity enrichment,
and multiplexing. By combining these approaches, several
thousand protein species can be identiﬁed routinely.
Obviously these numbers are better than those obtained
through bottom-up methods from gels, but they still fall far
short of those necessary for complete understanding of
biological systems.
The term proteomics is often used in the context of
biomarker discovery. To date, very few markers have been
discovered using proteomics methods that have migrated to
the clinical laboratory. Some of the reasons for the dearth
of new protein biomarkers have recently been discussed.107
From a broader view, however, proteomics also may include
the application of MS for the analysis of known protein and
peptide biomarkers. For example, mass spectrometric
methods for the analysis of carbohydrate-deﬁcient transferrin
have been developed, including a reference method108 and a
method for routine patient testing. Additional areas of

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
application of MS include analysis of the proteome of the
pathogenic mold Aspergillus fumigatus with the aim of
identifying vaccine candidates and new allergens.109
Analysis of thyroglobulin, a widely used marker of the
recurrence of thyroid cancer, has been described by several
groups.110-112 The initial digestion of the thyroglobulin by
trypsin also digests and therefore removes autoantibodies
which cause interference in immunoassays. Currently assays
based on the above principle are offered in several
commercial laboratories and represents substantial progress
in the application of MS for routine analysis of proteins as
well as providing important information to treating physicians.
Promising proof-of-principle research has been performed
on the characterization of hemoglobinopathies by MS.113,114
Most methods for hemoglobin analysis use MS to detect separate hemoglobin chains or peptide products from enzymatic
digests of hemoglobin. However, as shown by Rockwood and
coworkers,115 and shortly thereafter by Ganem and associates,116,117 the retention of higher order structure, such as
noncovalent complexes, is possible when ions are transferred
from solution to gas phase, and hemoglobin tetramers have
been observed by MS.118 Another hemoglobin application,
a reference method for hemoglobin A1c using MS, has been
approved by the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine.119 LC-MS methods for
quantitative analysis of hepcidin, a peptide hormone believed
to be a master regulator of iron status, have been published.120-122
Genetic applications for clinical MS are beginning to
emerge. For example, MALDI-TOF has been used for
mutation detection in myeloproliferative disorders,123 DNA
methylation analysis,124,125 and gene expression analysis.126
A promising genomic approach for pathogen identiﬁcation uses polymerase chain reaction ampliﬁcation of selected
regions of a pathogen genome, followed by accurate mass
measurement using ESI-TOF-MS. From the accurate mass
information, a DNA base composition is computed, and
the results are matched to pathogen DNA base compositions
in a database.127,128
A burgeoning area in which MS plays a role is the
emerging ﬁeld of metabolomics. This scientiﬁc area involves
the investigation and characterization of small molecules,
including intermediates and products of metabolism, present
in biological ﬂuids under different conditions that include (1)
normal homeostasis, (2) disease states, (3) stress, (4) dietary
modiﬁcation, (5) treatment protocols, and (6) aging. In a
fashion similar to a mass spectrum providing a ﬁngerprint
signature for a speciﬁc molecule, it has been speculated that
compounds identiﬁed and evaluated in metabolomic studies
may provide a ﬁngerprint signature for different physiologic
states.
In practice, metabolites are identiﬁed through comparison
with (1) known reference materials, (2) commercial or
in-house developed mass spectral libraries or metabolite
databases, (3) interpretation of mass spectra, or (4) ancillary
techniques such as nuclear magnetic resonance. As with other
applications of MS, both GC-MS and LC-MS have a place
in such studies. GC-MS has some potential advantages
that were described earlier. To use GC-MS, however, the metabolites in the sample must be volatile, or derivatization

55

needs to be used to enhance detectability of a larger number
of compounds.
LC-MS has its own usefulness in metabolomics because it
has potentially wider applicability to polar and nonpolar
compounds and allows the observation of the molecular or
pseudomolecular ions. However, because reference materials
or isotope-labeled internal reference materials do not exist for
validating ionization efﬁciencies or recoveries for some of
the biologically relevant compounds, the effects of ion
suppression (discussed later) remain a potential confounding
factor. Compared with proteomic research, metabolomics
faces the added difﬁculties in that the MS/MS spectra are
more difﬁcult to interpret, scarce information is available in
the MS/MS libraries, and DNA and protein sequence
databases are of no use in interpreting the results.
Mass spectral imaging of tissue sections is another emerging
technology that has potential for clinical applications and
holds a great promise. The most common approach is to apply
MALDI MS to image tissue sections.129,130 A mass spectrum is
acquired at each spot on a regularly spaced array across the
sample. From these data, an image is constructed for each
m/z. The images provide a spatial map of chemical composition (peptides or small molecules) from the sample. Another
approach uses laser ablation, followed by ICP-MS, to provide
a spatial map of the inorganic elemental composition of the
sample.131 This technique can be extended to immunohistochemical imaging by using metal-labeled antibodies.132 With
this scheme, it is possible to use different labels on different antibodies to do multiplexed imaging of several different targets
on the same sample. However, it should be noted that at the
present time mass spectral imaging is an extremely timeconsuming process because the beam has to be rastered across
the tissue by the laser many thousands of times and very large
amounts of data need to be processed and analyzed. At this
time this is mainly a research technique that is not used in
routine diagnostic laboratories.

Practical Aspects of Mass Spectrometry: Logistics,
Operations, and Quality
In many respects, the logistics, operations, quality control,
and quality assurance processes for clinical MS laboratories
follow the well-established clinical laboratory standards
and guidelines. However, mass spectrometers are complex
instruments and most manufacturers of instrumentation
are still learning how to best support their clients in clinical
laboratories. Consequently, the adoption of MS, and
especially the more complex technologies such as LC-MS/
MS, places added demands on training, competency, and
manufacturers’ support beyond those of more familiar and
well-established technologies used in clinical laboratories.
In contrast to techniques such as optical spectrophotometry, mass spectrometers tend to require more frequent
troubleshooting, tuning, calibration, and optimization, and
the laboratory inspection checklist of the College of American
Pathologists speciﬁes that mass spectrometer performance
should be veriﬁed daily.133 In addition, the frequency
of calibrations and optimizations needed to maintain
instruments in ﬁt-for-purpose condition will vary, depending

56

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

on the requirements of the assays being performed, the
instrumentation used, and other factors.
The term calibration in relation to MS is used in at least
two distinct ways. The ﬁrst is calibration of the m/z scale of
the instrument, usually referred to as mass calibration. The
other is calibration for quantitative analysis.
Schedules for mass calibration vary among laboratories,
types of instruments used, and types of assays being run.
For example, if accurate mass measurements are an
important part of a method, as with many assays that employ
TOF-MS, then very frequent mass calibration is typically
required. In some cases, internal mass reference materials
are included within each run, or even within each sample.
For applications that are less dependent on mass accuracy,
such as most quantitative methods performed on quadruple
mass analyzers, mass calibration may be performed less
frequently. For example, mass calibration may be performed
every few weeks, with veriﬁcation of mass calibration
performed more frequentlydas often as daily in some
laboratories.
Similarly, based on validation results obtained in individual
laboratories, schedules for calibration for quantitative analysis
may vary. For example, some laboratories calibrate an assay
daily, whereas others calibrate with every run.
One advantage of MS is that most methods in the MS
laboratories avoid the use of highly specialized reagents
such as commercial kits of reagents and antibodies.
Consumables are mostly generic items, such as solvents,
chromatographic columns, and sample vials or 96-well plates.
This tends to buffer the laboratory from supply disruptions of
specialized reagents, and in some cases can decrease consumable costs as well. However, consumables must be carefully
selected and monitored for quality, because contaminated
reagents and supplies may negatively affect performance of
the methods; this problem is far too common. Solvent quality
is of particular concern. For example, one study documented
wide variations in methanol quality from different suppliers,
which can lead to large differences in ionization efﬁciency
and cause interferences in the analysis.134
Whenever possible, a quantitative method should use
isotopically labeled internal standards, which typically differ
from the analyte of interest by substitution of monoisotopic
ions with isotope labels (typically deuterium, 13C, or 15N).
However, it is not always possible to obtain isotopically labeled
versions of each target analyte, in which case a closely related
chemical analog should be selected as an internal standard.
MS provides several opportunities for enhancing analytical
quality and therefore improving patient care. The high degree
of selectivity of MS, particularly when included as a part of
hyphenated techniques (GC-MS, LC-MS, LC-MS/MS, etc.)
reduces the likelihood of interference compared with
immunoassays or separation-based techniques (GC or LC)
using nonspeciﬁc detection, particularly for small molecule
analysis, where cross-reactivity is a concern.135 Perhaps as
important as a high degree of selectivity, MS provides a means
to detect the presence of interferences when they occur. With
methods that produce fragmentation, in the ion source (as in
EI) or in a collision cell (as in MS/MS), fragment ions are
produced with reproducible relative intensity (compared to
the base peak). By monitoring one or more ratios of the
ion fragments, and by comparing these ratios to ratios

obtained from authentic reference materials measured in
the same run, it is possible to detect the presence of
interfering compounds on a sample-by-sample basis.136
In addition, accurate mass measurements are useful for
detecting interferences if one is using an instrument capable
of such measurements, such as a TOF mass spectrometer. To
illustrate, the accurate mass of protonated cortisol
(C21H31Oþ
5 ) is 363.2166 Da, whereas the accurate mass of
one of the isotope peaks of protonated molecule of the
drug fenoﬁbrate (C20H22ClOþ
4 ) is 363.1180 Dada difference
of 271 ppm. Therefore an interference of even a few percent
by fenoﬁbrate (drug used for treating patients with high
cholesterol and high triglycerides) in a cortisol analysis would
be detectable as a shift in mass of the observed peak on an
instrument capable of low single-digit parts per million
mass accuracy.137
Obviously, detection of interferences by accurate mass
measurement alone becomes more difﬁcult as the mass of
the interfering compound approaches that of the target
compound, but given the ability to detect interferences at a
z 20% level or better, and assuming a mass spectrometer
of z 3 ppm mass accuracy, a reasonable estimate is that
interferences could be detected for all compounds with
jDm/zj greater than 30 ppm relative to the target compound.
Given the cortisol example discussed earlier, 22 chemical
formulas for ions are within 30 ppm of the mass of protonated cortisol, provided we limit our list to the composition
constraints listed earlier. Interferences from these would be
difﬁcult or impossible to detect by mass measurement alone.
Thus accurate mass would likely detect the majority of
possible interferences, but some of the potentially interfering
compounds would be difﬁcult or impossible to detect.

OPTIMIZATION OF INSTRUMENT CONDITIONS
When developing an MS-based method there are many
parameters to optimize. This applies to both the mass
spectrometer and the separation method.

Selection of Mass Transitions and Operating
Conditions
MRM is the most commonly used type of acquisition in
LC-MS/MS methods for targeted analysis. MRM-based
methods allow sensitive and speciﬁc quantitation of analytes
in samples with complex matrices. Typical MRM chromatograms contain one peak or a few peaks, which are easy to
integrate, particularly if the sample preparation has been
well designed.
When developing MRM methods, it is useful to start with
identifying all analyte-speciﬁc mass transitions. The typical
approach for selection and optimization of mass transitions
is through infusion of solution of pure standard of the
targeted compound using syringe pump. During the infusion,
the signal can be optimized by adjusting the ion source
conditions, declustering potential, the ion transmission
conditions, and collisional fragmentation. When ions are
transported from atmospheric pressure to the vacuum
region, they typically exist in the form of clusters. Application
of the declustering potential during the ion focusing causes
low-energy collisions, which lead to declustering of the ions.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
The MRM experiments are set by specifying m/z of the
precursor ion (typically the molecular ion) of the targeted
molecule and the m/z of the molecule-speciﬁc fragments,
produced by fragmentation in the collision cell. While
developing a method, it is important to carefully assess which
mass transitions to be used in the method. The best sensitivity
and speciﬁcity are typically achieved using high-intensity
unique fragment ions, which have minimal background
noise and no interfering peaks coeluting with the analyte of
interest. Use of fragment ions corresponding to the loss of
water, ammonia, carbonyl (CO), and CO2 groups generally
should be avoided because they result in nonspeciﬁc mass
transitions.
The optimal values of the voltages needed for declustering
the molecular ion and the ion transmission are established
by scanning the voltages and ﬁnding the apex values that
correspond to the maximum signal intensity. Optimization
of the collision energy (CE) is accomplished by scanning
the CE used for fragmentation of the molecular ion, and
plotting the abundances as a function of CE produces a
proﬁle, called a breakdown curve (Fig. 2.19).
In the majority of cases, the voltage corresponding to the
apex is selected for use in the method. At this value of the CE
there is maximum signal intensity. A second advantage of
operating at the apex is that slight ﬂuctuations in the
instrument conditions do not result in large changes in
the signal intensity, so the acquired signal is more stable.
However, on some occasions, when unresolved chromatographic peaks could interfere with the analysis, it is beneﬁcial
to select CE on the leading slope or the trailing slope of the
breakdown curve (more commonly on the leading slope) to
improve speciﬁcity of analysis by avoiding fragmentation of
the substance that potentially interferes with target analyte.
This can be useful in cases in which the breakdown
curve of an MS/MS transition of a potentially interfering
compound partially overlaps that of the target compound.
In such cases, by operating on the slope of the breakdown
curve of the selected MS/MS transition of the target
compound it may be possible to more strongly discriminate
from the interfering substances.
In addition to evaluating breakdown curves, CE should
be selected with the following principles in mind. If the CE
is too low, ion fragmentation will be inefﬁcient, and the signal

abundance will be low. If the CE is too high, fragmentation
can become too extensive; the number of peaks in the
product ion spectrum may increase intensity of the peaks
that are selective to the product ion of interest may have
insufﬁcient intensity to be useful, and the possibility of
interfering peaks from coeluting isobars may increase.
Depending on the type of ionization source used,
ionizability of molecules is inﬂuenced by their volatility,
pKa, proton afﬁnity, electronegativity, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, surfactant properties, solution pH, ionization
energy, electron collision cross-section, etc. Of the ionization
methods most commonly used in the MS applications in
clinical laboratories, ESI is typically used for analysis of polar
and ionizable molecules and APCI and APPI are used for
nonpolar molecules. When a new method is being developed,
available ionization techniques and polarity modes should be
evaluated to assess effect of the conditions on the signal
response and speciﬁcity of the detection.
The electrospray voltage and ion source conditions have a
great effect on the ionization efﬁciency; the optimal voltage depends on the molecular structure, mobile phase composition,
and ﬂow rate. At higher electrospray voltages, greater ﬂuctuation in the ionization efﬁciency can be observed and a larger
number of impurities present in the sample may get ionized,
potentially causing the loss of speciﬁcity and poor reproducibility. Therefore the lowest voltage resulting in an adequate
sensitivity for the analyte is typically preferred. In general
terms, there tends to be a threshold voltage, below which
ionization is very inefﬁcient; if the ESI voltage is too high,
corona discharge or other undesirable effects may occur.

Online Two-Dimensional Separations
Two-dimensional chromatographic separation is a technique
in which separation is performed using two HPLC columns
with phases having different selectivity. The chromatographic
columns are connected to each other through a switching
valve, the sample is injected in the ﬁrst column, and efﬂuent
of the column is directed to waste. At the time when the
targeted peak is eluted from the the ﬁrst column, the efﬂuent
is redirected into the second column, then during the column
reconditioning and equilibration the switching valve is
turned back to the original position. Using this approach,
chromatographic columns with complementary (orthogonal

a

Intensity, cps

7.5e4
d

b
5.0e4

2.5e4

c
e

10

20

30

40

50

57

60
70
CE, Volts

80

90

100

110

120

FIGURE 2.19 Breakdown curves for collision energy scans of cortisol. Curves correspond to mass transitions: adm/z 363
/ 345, bdm/z 363 / 327, cdm/z 363 / 171, ddm/z 363 / 121, edm/z 363 / 97. cps, Counts per second; CE,
collision energy.

58

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

or partially orthogonal) selectivity are typically used, so that
peaks that are poorly resolved or unresolved by the ﬁrst
column would get separated on the second column.
In addition to the use of different stationary phases with
complementary retention mechanisms, the selectivity may
be modiﬁed through selection of the optimum for each
separation mobile phase and temperature. Some advantages
of well-designed 2D separations may include greater resolving
power, faster analysis time (while the separation takes place on
one column, the other column could be conditioned and
reequilibrated), reduced contamination of the mass analyzer
(major fraction of the efﬂuent from the ﬁrst column is directed
to waste and not transferred into the second column), and
ability to use for the second separation a mobile phase that
is favorable for the optimal ionization efﬁciency. Various
coupling strategies have been developed for the switching valve
conﬁguration and the peak transfer from the ﬁrst to the
second column; the choice of the speciﬁc strategy is methoddependent and would affect the robustness of the assay.
Two-dimensional separations are more difﬁcult to develop
and troubleshoot, but in many cases the beneﬁts in the
methods’ performance overweigh the drawbacks.

Conventional Versus Microﬂow Separations
As more LC-MS methods are developed, greater sensitivity
and reduced sample volume are often required. This is
especially true for analysis of novel biomarkers. Other trends
in modern analytical laboratories are aimed at reducing the
volume of solvents used, the cost of the used mobile phase
disposal, and the costs of labor. The beneﬁts of microﬂow
separations in LC-MS analysis have been widely reported138;
they include a higher sensitivity, greater efﬁciency of ion
sampling, reduced solvent consumption and waste, and
reduced contamination of the ion source. Despite the
advantages, there are relatively few micro-ﬂow based
LC-MS methods currently used in routine laboratories. The
main reasons are related to the fact that these separations
historically were insufﬁciently rugged, required greater
technical expertise of the staff, and caused frequent interruptions in the workﬂow of a laboratory. However, recent
publications on comparison of the microﬂow and highﬂow-rate traditional LC-MS/MS methods demonstrated the
rugged method’s performance with up to 10-fold gain in
the signal-to-noise ratios and up to 20-fold reduction in the
use of the solvents.138

Ion Suppression
Ion suppression is another quality issue that should be
evaluated during method development and validation.139
First described in 1993,140,141 ion suppression is a matrix
effect that results from the presence of coeluting nonvolatile
or less volatile compounds (or compounds with greater
proton afﬁnity) that change the efﬁciency of spray droplet
formation, ionic properties, and evaporation. These interfering substances, which include salts, ion-pairing agents,
endogenous compounds, surfactants, drugs and/or metabolites, compete with analyte ions for access to the droplet
surface or transfer to the gas phase, which, in turn, affects
the number of charged ions in the gas phase that ultimately
reach the detector.142 Anions, such as phosphate or borate

in buffers, also can neutralize the effective ionization of an
analyte. Phospholipids present in biological samples and
impurities introduced during the sample preparation and
analysis have been demonstrated to be major contributors
to ion suppression.134,143
Ion suppression refers to the effect of the constituents
of the sample that suppresses ionization of the analyte of
interest. Factors contributing to ion suppression include
greater ionizability of the substances coeluting with the
peak of interest, and concentration of the coeluting substance
causing ion suppression. Ion suppression can have an adverse
effect on the accuracy, precision, and sensitivity of the assay,
particularly if the internal standard does not perfectly coelute
with the targeted analyte, in which case the internal standard
and the analyte may undergo different extents of ion suppression and thus compromise quantitative measurements. This
is most likely to happen if the internal standard is highly
deuterated. Ion suppression also may reduce the signal of
the target analyte to nearly undetectable levels, in which
case it is essentially impossible to obtain an accurate
quantitative result. Of the different types of ionization
techniques used in LC-MS methods, ESI tends to be most
susceptible to ion suppression; methods using APCI are
typically less prone to the effects of ion suppression, but
the possibility of ion suppression in APCI should not be
dismissed without validation.
Considering that biological samples contain a large
number of endogenous molecules with concentrations
ranging over a very wide dynamic range, ion suppression
should be expected and the effects of ion suppression should
be evaluated for all new or modiﬁed methods. The presence
of ion suppression or other deleterious matrix effects can
be evaluated via several experimental protocols.1 One involves comparison of (1) the instrument response for reference materials (including any internal standards) injected
directly in the mobile phase, and (2) the same amount of
compound spiked into preextracted samples.144 Data for
the standard in the mobile phase provide a relative 100%
response value. Data for the same amount of compound
spiked into preextracted samples show the effects of sample
matrix on MS response (ion suppression).
A second, more commonly used and preferred protocol
involves postcolumn continuous infusion of compound
into the MS detector, while analyzing samples (type intended
for the evaluated method, eg, serum, plasma, urine) prepared
according to the protocol of the evaluated method.145-147 The
instrumental setup includes a syringe pump connected via a
tee to the column efﬂuent (Fig. 2.20). Because the compound
being tested is introduced into the ion source at a constant
rate, a constant instrument response should be observed if
no ionization suppression or enhancement occurs while
analyzing biological specimens (Fig. 2.21, A). Typically there
is suppression of the signal at the portion of the analysis that
corresponds to the void volume of the HPLC column (see
Fig. 2.21, B). The void volume is that portion of a chromatogram corresponding to no retention other than the time it
takes for the mobile phase to ﬂow through the column.
Thus it represents a chromatographic time region, despite
the word volume in the terminology.
The degree of ion suppression and the recovery time to
full response can vary from assay to assay145 and among the

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry

Tee
HPLC

Column

ES
Interface

Mass
Detector

Syringe
Pump

FIGURE 2.20 Postcolumn infusion system. Mobile phase or
specimen extracts are injected into the high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) system. The analyte being evaluated is
continuously infused, post column, and is mixed with the
column efﬂuent through a tee before entering the electrospray
interface (ES).

A

Ion Intensity, ⫹105

8
4
0
1

3

5

7

1

3

5

7

8
4
0

B

Minutes

FIGURE 2.21 Infusion chromatograms for hypothetical analytes.
A, Mobile-phase injection. B, Serum liquid-liquid extract injection.
These proﬁles illustrate that ion suppression can be greater than
90%, that a recovery time may exist, and that suppression is
not limited to the solvent front region. For a comprehensive
presentation of these types of effects, the reader is referred to
references 145 to 147.

samples and can be dependent on the sample preparation
method, chromatographic column used, and LC separation
conditions. Because endogenous compounds from the
specimen matrix may elute at any time during the chromatographic run, ion suppression is not limited to the column
void and not limited to the analysis time of the evaluated
sample. In the case of strongly retained compounds, substances causing ion suppression may elute in subsequent
injections. Considering this, the detector response should
be monitored during analysis of multiple patient samples,
to ensure that ion suppression will not affect subsequent injections. The observed degree of ion suppression also can be
dependent on the sample volume aliquotted for the analysis,
the injection volume, and the concentration of the analyte being monitored,148 which is related to the matrix-to-analyte
concentration ratio.149 It should be noted that the degree of
the matrix effect might differ among the samples of the
same biological material, as has been ably shown by Matuszewski and colleagues.150,151
To control for ion suppression, it is highly desirable to use
matrix-matched calibration standards and controls. It is
important to evaluate ion suppression for all types of sample
matrices intended for analysis by the method; in addition,
considering the complexity of biological samples and
the between-subject differences, there may be substantial

59

ﬂuctuations in the concentrations of the ion-suppressing
species among samples. Because of this, a signiﬁcant number
of individual samples of all sample matrices intended for the
method (serum, plasma, urine, etc.) should be used during
the evaluation of the ion suppression.
In cases in which the isotope-labeled internal standards do
not completely coelute with the analytes of interest, ion
suppression cannot be completely compensated by the
internal standard. This problem is particularly acute when
using an internal standard that is highly deuterated, because
these compounds are likely to not totally coelute with the
native compound, and this can lead to signiﬁcant quantitative
errors in the analysis.152 The 13C- or 15N-labeled compounds
are chromatographically retained identically to the
nonlabeled analogs and are not susceptible to the previously
described problem.
Ion suppression is not limited to HPLC-MS or ESI/APCI ion
sources. For MALDI analysis, arginine-containing peptides
have been reported to dominate over the signal from other peptides in protein digests,153 with the extent depending on the
matrix used. The presence of ionic detergents, such as Triton
X-100 and Tween 20, has also been shown to cause signal suppression in MALDI experiments, which can be countered by
modiﬁcations to the matrix.154

Noise Reduction Techniques
In MS, background noise refers to the sum of electronic and
chemical noise, which is independent of the data signal.
Presence of the background noise interferes with the
measurements and affects accuracy and speciﬁcity of analysis,
especially at low concentrations. Reduction of chemical noise
has been one of the aims for improvement since introduction
of MS as an analytical technique. This is sometimes known as
the “peak-at-every-mass” problem. The problem has long
been known to mass spectrometrists, and it affects virtually
all ionization methods to some degree.
Chemical noise is often dominant over electronic noise in
MS. Background ions are inherent of atmospheric pressure
ionization and related to the presence of impurities in the
samples and in the mobile phases, residues accumulating
on the surfaces of the ion source, and in part the high
efﬁciency of atmospheric pressure ionization. Approaches
used for noise reduction include optimizing the sample
preparation, improving selectivity of ionization, optimization
of the declustering conditions and ion transmission, maintaining cleanliness of the ion sources, and the ﬂow path of
the separation device.
One effective way for signiﬁcant reduction of the effect of
the background noise on the methods’ performance is the use
of MS/MS acquisition (MRM, neutral loss scan, product ion
scan, and precursor ion scan), which allows substantial
improvement of the detection speciﬁcity and reduction of
the effects of chemical noise. Other approaches for reduction
of the background noise include the use of mass analyzers
with high resolving power (see Fig. 2.3); the use of
multidimensional separations along with MS, such as ion
mobility separations (IMS); high FAIMS; multidimensional
chromatographic separations; and the incorporation of
additional stages of fragmentation (MS/MS/MS). Softwarebased approaches (eg, dynamic background subtraction,
active background noise reduction) also have been applied

60

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

as noise reduction techniques. The previously mentioned
techniques allow a reduction in the interference from the
chemical background noise, but do not affect its cause. The
best approach to the reduction of chemical background noise
is the use of more extensive and efﬁcient sample cleanup (as a
way of minimizing introduction of contaminants into the ion
source) and the use of high-purity solvents and additives
for the mobile phases. This brings up the general issue of
developing methods that are ﬁt for purpose, but not so
complex or expensive that their use will be impractical. Every
laboratory needs to balance these factors in a way that is
consistent with their goals, throughput, and constraints.
With regard to reducing background noise by using mass
analyzers with high resolving power, it is important to understand the relationships among resolution, background
noise (primarily chemical noise), electronic noise, and total
signal level. A complete discussion is beyond the scope of
the chapter, but a few general concepts can be useful to the
clinical chemist without necessarily delving into all of the
subtleties. For the sake of discussion, let us consider TOF
detection. As mentioned earlier, this type of mass spectrometer acquires the full mass spectrum; that is, it is not possible
to operate the instrument in SIM mode (or MRM mode in
the case of a quadrupole TOF). However, it is possible to
simulate SIM or MRM mode in postprocessing by integrating
the mass spectrum over a limited m/z range and plotting the
result as a function of spectrum number or chromatographic
retention time.
If the m/z window is wide compared to the mass spectral
peak width, the portion of the integrated signal arising from
the targeted peak is independent of peak width. However, the
signal arising from chemical noise generally increases with
increasing width of the m/z window. This corresponds to
the conditions in Figure 2.3, Adthe FWHM of the TOF
mass spectrometer was approximately 0.06 Da, whereas the
window for generating the simulated SIM was 1 Da. Thus
one would expect the chemical noise to decrease as the width
of the integration window decreases.
The simulated SIM in Figure 2.3, B has the integration
window set at 0.0072 Da, nearly an order of magnitude
narrower than the peak width of the mass spectrometer.
Under these conditions (ie, with the integration window
much narrower than the peak width), narrowing the
integration window still further affects chemical noise and
target analyte signal nearly equally, so there is very little to
be gained in terms of improving the signal-to-noise ratio by
making the integration window narrower. Furthermore, in
some cases there is a danger of increased statistical noise in
the signal because ion numbers are quantized, which shows
up as shot noise in the integrated signal. The signal-to-noise
ratio in the shot noise-limit scales as 1 over the square root of
the integration window widthdthat is, it gets worse as the
window is made narrower. Discussion of the effect of the
electronic noise on the noise budget is outside of the scope
of this chapter, but it can be evaluated using methods
analogous to those discussed previously.
Thus, in many cases, there is an optimum operating
condition wherein the optimal integration window is often
roughly equal to the peak width of the mass spectrometer.
One additional comment is in order. Narrowing the integration window does nothing to reduce chemical noise if an

interfering species is strictly isobaric with the targeted species. This implies that it is not at all useful if the goal is to
reduce interferences from isomers. Furthermore, it is of
very little usefulness if the mass offset of the interfering
compound from the targeted compound is less than the
peak width of the mass spectrometer. Nevertheless, as
Figure 2.3 illustrates, a narrow window can be useful in
improving the quality of chromatograms, and, as one can
infer from the earlier discussion, this technique works best
when using a high-resolution mass spectrometer.

POINTS TO REMEMBER
• MS is a highly sensitive and selective technique for
analyzing a wide variety of clinically relevant analytes.
• MS relies on ionizing analytes in a sample, followed by separation of the ions according to their mass to charge ratios.
• When coupled with a separation technology such as gas
chromatography or liquid chromatography, the hybrid technique is well suited for the quantitative analysis of clinically
relevant molecules from bodily tissues and ﬂuids.
• The use of MS for clinical applications has led to the development of highly speciﬁc assays that can overcome many
of the issues faced when using immunoassays, such as
cross-reactivity.
• Although highly selective, MS is not immune from interferences; molecules with same m/z (isomers and isobars) and
similar fragmentation pattern may interfere with analysis

REFERENCES
1. Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute. Mass spectrometry in
the clinical laboratory. General principles and practice: approved
guideline, vol. C-50A. Wayne, Penn: Clinical Laboratory
Standards Institute; 2007.
2. Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute. Liquid
chromatography-mass spectrometry methods, vol. C-62A. Wayne,
Penn: Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute; 2014.
3. Fenn JB. Electrospray wings for molecular elephants (Nobel
lecture). Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2003;42:3871e94.
4. Fenn JB, Mann M, Meng CK, et al. Electrospray ionization for
mass spectrometry of large biomolecules. Science 1989;246:
64e71.
5. Koy C, Mikkat S, Raptakis E, et al. Matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization-quadrupole ion trap-time of ﬂight mass
spectrometry sequencing resolves structures of unidentiﬁed
peptides obtained by in-gel tryptic digestion of haptoglobin
derivatives from human plasma proteomes. Proteomics 2003;3:
851e8.
6. Nakanishi T, Okamoto N, Tanaka K, et al. Laser desorption
time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometric analysis of transferrin
precipitated with antiserum: a unique simple method to identify
molecular weight variants. Biol Mass Spectrom 1994;23:230e3.
7. Tanaka K. The origin of macromolecule ionization by laser
irradiation (Nobel lecture). Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2003;42:
3860e70.
8. Urry FM, Kushnir M, Nelson G, et al. Improving ion mass ratio
performance at low concentrations in methamphetamine
GC-MS assay through internal standard selection. J Anal Toxicol
1996;20:592e5.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
9. Currie L. Nomenclature in evaluation of analytical methods
including detection and quantiﬁcation capabilities. Pure Appl
Chem 1995;67:1699e723.
10. Calvert J. Glossary of atmospheric chemistry terms 1990. Pure
Appl Chem 1990;62:2167e219.
11. Cech NB, Enke CG. Practical implications of some recent
studies in electrospray ionization fundamentals. Mass Spectrom
Rev 2001;20:362e87.
12. Ermer J, Vogel M. Applications of hyphenated LC-MS
techniques in pharmaceutical analysis. Biomed Chromatogr
2000;14:373e83.
13. Glish GL, Vachet RW. The basics of mass spectrometry in
the twenty-ﬁrst century. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2003;2:140e50.
14. Huang C, Wachs T, Conboy J, et al. Atmospheric pressure
ionization mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 1990;62:
713Ae25A.
15. Todd J. Recommendations for nomenclature and symbolism
for mass spectrometry. IUPAC recommendations. Pure Appl
Chem 1991;63:1541e66.
16. Whitehouse CM, Dreyer RN, Yamashita M, et al. Electrospray
interface for liquid chromatographs and mass spectrometers.
Anal Chem 1985;57:675e9.
17. Yamashita M, Fenn JB. Electrospray ion source: another variation on the free-jet theme. J Phys Chem A 1984;88:4451e9.
18. Chen J, Shiyanov P, Schlager JJ, et al. A pseudo MS3 approach
for identiﬁcation of disulﬁde-bonded proteins: uncommon
product ions and database search. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom
2012;23:225e43.
19. Yamada N, Suzuki E, Hirayama K. Effective novel dissociation
methods for intact protein: heat-assisted nozzle-skimmer
collisionally induced dissociation and infrared multiphoton
dissociation using a Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance
mass spectrometer equipped with a micrometal electrospray
ionization emitter. Anal Biochem 2006;348:139e47.
20. Rockwood AL, Busman M, Udseth HR, et al. Thermally
induced dissociation of ions from electrospray mass
spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1991;5:582e5.
21. Carroll D, Dizdic I, Stillwell R, et al. Atmospheric pressure
ionization mass spectrometry: corona discharge ion source for
use in liquid chromatograph-mass spectrometer-computer
analytical system. Anal Chem 1975;47:2369e73.
22. Robb DB, Covey TR, Bruins AP. Atmospheric pressure photoionization: an ionization method for liquid chromatographymass spectrometry. Anal Chem 2000;72:3653e9.
23. Syage J, Evans M, Hanold K. Photoionization mass
spectrometry. Am Lab 2000;12:24e9.
24. Syage J, Hanning-Lee M, Hanold K. A man-portable,
photoionization time-of-ﬂight spectometer. Field Anal Chem
Toxicol 2000;4:204e15.
25. Elkadi M, Pillay A, Manuel J, et al. Sustainability study on heavy
metal uptake in Neem Biodiesel using selective catalytic
preparation and hyphenated mass spectrometry. Sustainability
2014;6:2413e23.
26. Becker JS. Inorganic mass spectrometry: principles and
applications. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons; 2007.
p. 181e7.
27. Takats Z, Wiseman JM, Gologan B, et al. Mass spectrometry
sampling under ambient conditions with desorption
electrospray ionization. Science 2004;306:471e3.
28. Cody RB, Laramee JA, Durst HD. Versatile new ion source for
the analysis of materials in open air under ambient conditions.
Anal Chem 2005;77:2297e302.

61

29. Wang H, Liu J, Cooks RG, et al. Paper spray for direct analysis
of complex mixtures using mass spectrometry. Angew Chem Int
Ed Engl 2010;49:877e80.
30. Manicke NE, Abu-Rabie P, Spooner N, et al. Quantitative
analysis of therapeutic drugs in dried blood spot samples by
paper spray mass spectrometry: an avenue to therapeutic drug
monitoring. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2011;22:1501e7.
31. Price P. Standard deﬁnitions of terms relating to mass
spectrometry: a report from the committee on measurements
and standards of the American society for mass spectrometry.
J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 1991;2:336e48.
32. Cooks RG, Rockwood AL. The “Thomson”: a suggested unit for
mass spectroscopists. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1991;5:93.
33. de Hoffmann E, Stroobant V. Mass spectrometry principles and
applications. 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2001.
p. 63e122. 132e155.
34. de Hoffmann E, Stroobant V. Mass spectrometry principles and
applications. 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons; 2001. p. 361.
35. Siuzdak G. Mass analyzers and ion detectors. In: Siuzdak G,
editor. Mass analyzers and ion detectors. San Diego: Academic
Press; 1996. p. 32e55.
36. Dawson PH. Quadrupole mass spectometry and its applications.
New York: Elsevier; 1976. p. 65e78.
37. Dahl D Simion 6.0 ion optics computer program.
38. Bucknall M, Fung KY, Duncan MW. Practical quantitative
biomedical applications of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.
J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2002;13:1015e27.
39. Dawson J, Gilhaus M. Orthogonal-acceleration time-of-ﬂight
mass spectrometer. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1989;3:155e9.
40. Lazar I, Lee E, Rockwood AL, et al. General considerations for
optimizing a capillary electrophoresis-electrospray time-ofﬂight mass spectrometry system. J Chromatogr A 1998;829:
279e88.
41. Sin C, Lee E, Lee M. Atmospheric pressure ionization
time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 1991;63:
2897e900.
42. Mamyrin B, Karataev V, Shmikk D, et al. Mass reﬂectron: new
non-magnetic time-of-ﬂight high-resolution mass
spectrometer. Zh Eksp Teor Fiz 1973;64:82e9.
43. Rockwood AL. An improved time of ﬂight mass spectrometer.
Cincinnati, Ohio: 34th Annual American Society for Mass
Spectrometry; 1986.
44. Bystrom CE, Sheng S, Clarke NJ. Narrow mass extraction of
time-of-ﬂight data for quantitative analysis of proteins:
determination of insulin-like growth factor-1. Anal Chem 2011;
83:9005e10.
45. Bystrom C, Sheng S, Zhang K, et al. Clinical utility of
insulin-like growth factor 1 and 2: determination by high
resolution mass spectrometry. PLoS ONE 2012;7:e43457.
46. Marin SJ, Hughes JM, Lawlor BG, et al. Rapid
screening for 67 drugs and metabolites in serum or plasma
by accurate-mass LC-TOF-MS. J Anal Toxicol 2012;36:
477e86.
47. Makarov A, Scigelova M. Coupling liquid chromatography to
orbitrap mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr A 2010;1217:
3938e45.
48. Marshall AG, Hendrickson CL, Jackson GS. Fourier transform
ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry: a primer. Mass
Spectrom Rev 1998;17:1e35.
49. Kingdon K. A method for the neutralization of electron space
charge by positive ionization at very low gas pressures. Phys Rev
1923;21:408e18.

62

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

50. Makarov A. Electrostatic axially harmonic orbital trapping: a
high-performance technique of mass analysis. Anal Chem 2000;
72:1156e62.
51. Makarov A, Denisov E, Kholomeev A, et al. Performance
evaluation of a hybrid linear ion trap/orbitrap mass
spectrometer. Anal Chem 2006;78:2113e20.
52. Makarov A, Denisov E, Lange O, et al. Dynamic range of mass
accuracy in LTQ Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer. J Am Soc
Mass Spectrom 2006;17:977e82.
53. Perry RH, Cooks RG, Noll RJ. Orbitrap mass spectrometry:
instrumentation, ion motion and applications. Mass Spectrom
Rev 2008;27:661e99.
54. Hu Q, Noll RJ, Li H, et al. The orbitrap: a new mass
spectrometer. J Mass Spectrom 2005;40:430e43.
55. Erve JC, Gu M, Wang Y, et al. Spectral accuracy of
molecular ions in an LTQ/Orbitrap mass spectrometer
and implications for elemental composition determination.
J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2009;20:2058e69.
56. Rockwood AL, Erve JC. Mass spectral peak distortion due to
Fourier transform signal processing. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom
2014;25:2163e76.
57. Chace DH. Mass spectrometry-based diagnostics:
the upcoming revolution in disease detection has
already arrived. Clin Chem 2003;49:1227e8. author reply
1228e1229.
58. Kanu AB, Dwivedi P, Tam M, et al. Ion mobility-mass
spectrometry. J Mass Spectrom 2008;43:1e22.
59. Shvartsburg AA. Differential ion mobility spectrometry:
nonlinear ion transport and fundamentals of FAIMS. Boca
Raton, Fla: CRC Press; 2008.
60. Eiceman G, Karpas Z, Hill H. Ion mobility spectrometry: ion
mobility spectrometry. 3rd ed. Boca Raton, Fla: CRC Press; 2013.
p. 444.
61. Ray JA, Kushnir MM, Yost RA, et al. Performance
enhancement in the measurement of 5 endogenous
steroids by LC-MS/MS combined with differential ion
mobility spectrometry. Clin Chim Acta 2015;438:330e6.
62. Caulﬁeld MP, Li S, Lee G, et al. Direct determination of
lipoprotein particle sizes and concentrations by ion mobility
analysis. Clin Chem 2008;54:1307e16.
63. Krauss RM, Pinto CA, Liu Y, et al. Changes in LDL
particle concentrations after treatment with the cholesteryl
ester transfer protein inhibitor anacetrapib alone or
in combination with atorvastatin. J Clin Lipidol 2015;9:
93e102.
64. Rosenson RS, Davidson MH, Le NA, et al. Underappreciated
opportunities for high-density lipoprotein particles in risk
stratiﬁcation and potential targets of therapy. Cardiovasc Drugs
Ther 2015;29:41e50.
65. Mallard WG, Reed J. Automated mass spectrometry
deconvolution and identiﬁcation system (AMDIS) user guide.
Gaithersburg, MD: US Department of Commerce-Technology
Administration, National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), Standard Reference Data Program; 1997.
66. Rodriguez H, Tezak Z, Mesri M, et al. Analytical validation of
protein-based multiplex assays: a workshop report by the
NCI-FDA interagency oncology task force on molecular
diagnostics. Clin Chem 2010;56:237e43.
67. Kelley RI. Diagnosis of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome by gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry of 7-dehydrocholesterol
in plasma, amniotic ﬂuid and cultured skin ﬁbroblasts. Clin
Chim Acta 1995;236:45e58.

68. Maurer HH. Role of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
with negative ion chemical ionization in clinical and forensic
toxicology, doping control, and biomonitoring. Ther Drug
Monit 2002;24:247e54.
69. Stellaard F, ten Brink HJ, Kok RM, et al. Stable isotope dilution
analysis of very long chain fatty acids in plasma, urine and
amniotic ﬂuid by electron capture negative ion mass
fragmentography. Clin Chim Acta 1990;192:133e44.
70. Knapp D. Handbook of analytical derivatization reactions. New
York: John Wiley & Sons; 1979.
71. Drees JC, Stone JA, Olson KR, et al. Clinical utility of an
LC-MS/MS seizure panel for common drugs involved in
drug-induced seizures. Clin Chem 2009;55:126e33.
72. Maurer HH. Current role of liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry in clinical and forensic toxicology. Anal Bioanal
Chem 2007;388:1315e25.
73. Maurer HH. Mass spectrometric approaches in impaired
driving toxicology. Anal Bioanal Chem 2009;393:97e107.
74. Wu AH, Gerona R, Armenian P, et al. Role of liquid
chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry
(LC-HR/MS) in clinical toxicology. Clin Toxicol (Phila) 2012;
50:733e42.
75. Annesley T, Majzoub J, Hsing A, et al. Mass spectrometry in the
clinical laboratory: how have we done, and where do we need
to be? Clin Chem 2009;55:1236e9.
76. Yang Z, Wang S. Recent development in application of high
performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in therapeutic drug monitoring of immunosuppressants.
J Immunol Methods 2008;336:98e103.
77. de Jong WH, Graham KS, van der Molen JC, et al. Plasma free
metanephrine measurement using automated online solidphase extraction HPLC tandem mass spectrometry. Clin Chem
2007;53:1684e93.
78. Knox S, Harris J, Calton L, et al. A simple automated
solid-phase extraction procedure for measurement of
25-hydroxyvitamin D3 and D2 by liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry. Ann Clin Biochem 2009;46:
226e30.
79. Koal T, Burhenne H, Romling R, et al. Quantiﬁcation of
antiretroviral drugs in dried blood spot samples by means of
liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. Rapid
Commun Mass Spectrom 2005;19:2995e3001.
80. Remmel RP, Kawle SP, Weller D, et al. Simultaneous HPLC
assay for quantiﬁcation of indinavir, nelﬁnavir, ritonavir, and
saquinavir in human plasma. Clin Chem 2000;46:73e81.
81. de Castro A, Concheiro M, Quintela O, et al. LC-MS/MS
method for the determination of nine antidepressants and
some of their main metabolites in oral ﬂuid and plasma: study
of correlation between venlafaxine concentrations in both
matrices. J Pharm Biomed Anal 2008;48:183e93.
82. Subramanian M, Birnbaum AK, Remmel RP. High-speed
simultaneous determination of nine antiepileptic drugs using
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Ther Drug Monit
2008;30:347e56.
83. Wohlfarth A, Weinmann W, Dresen S. LC-MS/MS screening
method for designer amphetamines, tryptamines, and
piperazines in serum. Anal Bioanal Chem 2010;396:2403e14.
84. Kushnir MM, Komaromy-Hiller G, Shushan B, et al.
Analysis of dicarboxylic acids by tandem mass spectrometry:
high-throughput quantitative measurement of methylmalonic
acid in serum, plasma, and urine. Clin Chem 2001;47:
1993e2002.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
85. Lakso HA, Appelblad P, Schneede J. Quantiﬁcation of
methylmalonic acid in human plasma with hydrophilic
interaction liquid chromatography separation and mass
spectrometric detection. Clin Chem 2008;54:2028e35.
86. Yue B, Rockwood AL, Sandrock T, et al. Free thyroid hormones
in serum by direct equilibrium dialysis and online solid-phase
extraction-liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry.
Clin Chem 2008;54:642e51.
87. Kushnir MM, Blamires T, Rockwood AL, et al. Liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry assay for
androstenedione, dehydroepiandrosterone, and testosterone
with pediatric and adult reference intervals. Clin Chem 2010;
56:1138e47.
88. Soldin SJ, Soldin OP. Steroid hormone analysis by tandem mass
spectrometry. Clin Chem 2009;55:1061e6.
89. Chace DH, Kalas TA. A biochemical perspective on the use of
tandem mass spectrometry for newborn screening and clinical
testing. Clin Biochem 2005;38:296e309.
90. Chace DH, Kalas TA, Naylor EW. Use of tandem mass
spectrometry for multianalyte screening of dried blood
specimens from newborns. Clin Chem 2003;49:1797e817.
91. Chace DH, DiPerna JC, Mitchell BL, et al. Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry for analysis of acylcarnitines in dried
postmortem blood specimens collected at autopsy from infants with unexplained cause of death. Clin Chem 2001;47:
1166e82.
92. Hardy DT, Preece MA, Green A. Determination of plasma free
carnitine by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Ann Clin
Biochem 2001;38:665e70.
93. Casetta B, Tagliacozzi D, Shushan B, et al. Development of a
method for rapid quantitation of amino acids by liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) in
plasma. Clin Chem Lab Med 2000;38:391e401.
94. Chalcraft KR, Britz-McKibbin P. Newborn screening of inborn
errors of metabolism by capillary electrophoresis-electrospray
ionization-mass spectrometry: a second-tier method with
improved speciﬁcity and sensitivity. Anal Chem 2009;81:
307e14.
95. Chace DH. Mass spectrometry in newborn and metabolic
screening: historical perspective and future directions. J Mass
Spectrom 2009;44:163e70.
96. Rinaldo P, Cowan TM, Matern D. Acylcarnitine proﬁle analysis.
Genet Med 2008;10:151e6.
97. Gao S, Zhang ZP, Karnes HT. Sensitivity enhancement in liquid
chromatography/atmospheric pressure ionization mass
spectrometry using derivatization and mobile phase additives.
J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2005;825:
98e110.
98. Sherman NE, Stefansson B, Fox JW, et al. Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and a proteomic approach to bacterial pathogenesis.
Dis Markers 2001;17:285e93.
99. Wang Z, Dunlop K, Long SR, et al. Mass spectrometric
methods for generation of protein mass database used for
bacterial identiﬁcation. Anal Chem 2002;74:3174e82.
100. Eigner U, Holfelder M, Oberdorfer K, et al. Performance of a
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time-of-ﬂight
mass spectrometry system for the identiﬁcation of bacterial
isolates in the clinical routine laboratory. Clin Lab 2009;55:
289e96.
101. Szajli E, Feher T, Medzihradszky KF. Investigating the
quantitative nature of MALDI-TOF MS. Mol Cell Proteomics
2008;7:2410e8.

63

102. Batista BL, Grotto D, Rodrigues JL, et al. Determination of
trace elements in biological samples by inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometry with tetramethylammonium
hydroxide solubilization at room temperature. Anal Chim Acta
2009;646:23e9.
103. Beauchemin D. Inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry. Anal Chem 2002;74:2873e93.
104. Mandal BK, Ogra Y, Suzuki KT. Speciation of arsenic in human
nail and hair from arsenic-affected area by HPLC-inductively
coupled argon plasma mass spectrometry. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 2003;189:73e83.
105. Anderson NL. Counting the proteins in plasma. Clin Chem
2010;56:1775e6.
106. Kenyon GL, DeMarini DM, Fuchs E, et al. Deﬁning the
mandate of proteomics in the post-genomics era: workshop
report. Mol Cell Proteomics 2002;1:763e80.
107. Carr SA, Anderson L. Protein quantitation through targeted
mass spectrometry: the way out of biomarker purgatory? Clin
Chem 2008;54:1749e52.
108. Oberrauch W, Bergman AC, Helander A. HPLC and mass
spectrometric characterization of a candidate reference
material for the alcohol biomarker carbohydrate-deﬁcient
transferrin (CDT). Clin Chim Acta 2008;395:142e5.
109. Asif AR, Oellerich M, Amstrong VW, et al. Proteome of
conidial surface associated proteins of Aspergillus fumigatus
reﬂecting potential vaccine candidates and allergens.
J Proteome Res 2006;5:954e62.
110. Clarke NJ, Zhang Y, Reitz RE. A novel mass spectrometrybased assay for the accurate measurement of thyroglobulin
from patient samples containing antithyroglobulin
autoantibodies. J Investig Med 2012;60:1157e63.
111. Hoofnagle AN, Becker JO, Wener MH, et al. Quantiﬁcation
of thyroglobulin, a low-abundance serum protein, by
immunoafﬁnity peptide enrichment and tandem mass
spectrometry. Clin Chem 2008;54:1796e804.
112. Kushnir MM, Rockwood AL, Roberts WL, et al. Measurement of
thyroglobulin by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry in serum and plasma in the presence of
antithyroglobulin autoantibodies. Clin Chem 2013;59:982e90.
113. Bateman RH, Green BN, Morris M. Electrospray ionization
mass spectrometric analysis of the globin chains in hemoglobin
heterozygotes can detect the variants HbC, D, and E. Clin
Chem 2008;54:1256e7.
114. Wild BJ, Green BN, Stephens AD. The potential of electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry for the diagnosis of hemoglobin
variants found in newborn screening. Blood Cells Mol Dis 2004;
33:308e17.
115. Rockwood AL, Busman M, Smith RD. Coulombic effects in the
dissociation of large highly charged ions. Int J Mass Spectrom
Ion Processes 1991;111:103e29.
116. Ganem B, Li Y, Henion J. Detection of noncovalent receptorligand complexes by mass spectrometry. J Am Chem Soc 1991;
113:6294e6.
117. Ganem B, Li Y, Henion J. Observation of noncovalent enzyme
substrate and enzyme product complexes by ion spray mass
spectrometry. J Am Chem Soc 1991;113:7818e9.
118. Apostol I. Assessing the relative stabilities of engineered
hemoglobins using electrospray mass spectrometry. Anal
Biochem 1999;272:8e18.
119. Jeppsson JO, Kobold U, Barr J, et al. Approved IFCC reference
method for the measurement of HbA1c in human blood. Clin
Chem Lab Med 2002;40:78e89.

64

Principles and Applications of Clinical Mass Spectrometry

120. Wolff F, Deleers M, Melot C, et al. Hepcidin-25:
measurement by LC-MS/MS in serum and urine, reference
ranges and urinary fractional excretion. Clin Chim Acta 2013;
423:99e104.
121. Kobold U, Dulffer T, Dangl M, et al. Quantiﬁcation of
hepcidin-25 in human serum by isotope dilution microHPLC-tandem mass spectrometry. Clin Chem 2008;54:
1584e6.
122. Rochat B, Peduzzi D, McMullen J, et al. Validation of hepcidin
quantiﬁcation in plasma using LC-HRMS and discovery of a
new hepcidin isoform. Bioanalysis 2013;5:2509e20.
123. Fu JF, Shi JY, Zhao WL, et al. MassARRAY assay: a more
accurate method for JAK2V617F mutation detection in
Chinese patients with myeloproliferative disorders. Leukemia
2008;22:660e3.
124. Igarashi J, Muroi S, Kawashima H, et al. Quantitative analysis
of human tissue-speciﬁc differences in methylation. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 2008;376:658e64.
125. Wang SC, Oelze B, Schumacher A. Age-speciﬁc epigenetic
drift in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. PLoS ONE 2008;3:
e2698.
126. Au WY, Lam V, Pang A, et al. Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deﬁciency in female octogenarians, nanogenarians, and centenarians. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2006;
61:1086e9.
127. Ecker DJ, Sampath R, Massire C, et al. Ibis T5000: a universal
biosensor approach for microbiology. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008;
6:553e8.
128. Hofstadler S, Sampatha R, Blyna L, et al. TIGER: the universal
biosensor. Int J Mass Spectrom 2005;242:23e41.
129. Chaurand P, Sanders ME, Jensen RA, et al. Proteomics in
diagnostic pathology: proﬁling and imaging proteins directly
in tissue sections. Am J Pathol 2004;165:1057e68.
130. Cornett DS, Reyzer ML, Chaurand P, et al. MALDI imaging
mass spectrometry: molecular snapshots of biochemical
systems. Nat Methods 2007;4:828e33.
131. Becker J. Inorganic mass spectrometry: principles and
applications. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons; 2007.
p. 366e75.
132. Seuma J, Bunch J, Cox A, et al. Combination of
immunohistochemistry and laser ablation ICP mass
spectrometry for imaging of cancer biomarkers. Proteomics
2008;8:3775e84.
133. College of American Pathologists. Accreditation checklists.
CHM 2009;18600.
134. Annesley TM. Methanol-associated matrix effects in
electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. Clin Chem
2007;53:1827e34.
135. Hoofnagle AN, Wener MH. The fundamental ﬂaws of
immunoassays and potential solutions using tandem mass
spectrometry. J Immunol Methods 2009;347:3e11.
136. Kushnir MM, Rockwood AL, Nelson GJ, et al. Assessing
analytical speciﬁcity in quantitative analysis using tandem mass
spectrometry. Clin Biochem 2005;38:319e27.
137. Meikle AW, Findling J, Kushnir MM, et al. Pseudo-Cushing
syndrome caused by fenoﬁbrate interference with urinary
cortisol assayed by high-performance liquid chromatography.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;88:3521e4.

138. Christianson CC, Johnson CJ, Needham SR. The advantages
of microﬂow LC-MS/MS compared with conventional
HPLC-MS/MS for the analysis of methotrexate from human
plasma. Bioanalysis 2013;5:1387e96.
139. Annesley TM. Ion suppression in mass spectrometry. Clin
Chem 2003;49:1041e4.
140. Kebarle P, Tang L. From ions to solution in the gas phase: the
mechanism of eletrospray mass spectrometry. Anal Chem 1993;
65:972Ae86A.
141. Tang L, Kebarle P. Dependence of ion intensity in
electrospray mass spectrometry on the concentration of the
analytes in the electrosprayed solution. Anal Chem 1993;65:
3654e68.
142. King R, Bonﬁglio R, Fernandez-Metzler C, et al.
Mechanistic investigation of ionization suppression in
electrospray ionization. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2000;11:
942e50.
143. Xia YQ, Jemal M. Phospholipids in liquid chromatography/mass
spectrometry bioanalysis: comparison of three tandem mass
spectrometric techniques for monitoring plasma phospholipids,
the effect of mobile phase composition on phospholipids
elution and the association of phospholipids with matrix effects.
Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 2009;23:2125e38.
144. Matuszewski BK, Constanzer ML, Chavez-Eng CM. Matrix
effect in quantitative LC/MS/MS analyses of biological ﬂuids: a
method for determination of ﬁnasteride in human plasma at
picogram per milliliter concentrations. Anal Chem 1998;70:
882e9.
145. Bonﬁglio R, King RC, Olah TV, et al. The effects of sample
preparation methods on the variability of the electrospray
ionization response for model drug compounds. Rapid
Commun Mass Spectrom 1999;13:1175e85.
146. Hsieh Y, Chintala M, Mei H, et al. Quantitative screening and
matrix effect studies of drug discovery compounds in monkey
plasma using fast-gradient liquid chromatography/tandem
mass spectrometry. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 2001;15:
2481e7.
147. Muller C, Schafer P, Stortzel M, et al. Ion suppression
effects in liquid chromatography-electrospray-ionisation
transport-region collision induced dissociation mass spectrometry with different serum extraction methods for systematic toxicological analysis with mass spectra libraries.
J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2002;773:
47e52.
148. van Hout MW, Hoﬂand CM, Niederlander HA, et al. On-line
coupling of solid-phase extraction with mass spectrometry
for the analysis of biological samples. II. Determination of
clenbuterol in urine using multiple-stage mass spectrometry in
an ion-trap mass spectrometer. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom
2000;14:2103e11.
149. Heller DN. Ruggedness testing of quantitative atmospheric
pressure ionization mass spectrometry methods: the effect of
co-injected matrix on matrix effects. Rapid Commun Mass
Spectrom 2007;21:644e52.
150. Matuszewski BK. Standard line slopes as a measure of a relative
matrix effect in quantitative HPLC-MS bioanalysis.
J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2006;830:
293e300.

CHAPTER 2 Mass Spectrometry
151. Matuszewski BK, Constanzer ML, Chavez-Eng CM. Strategies
for the assessment of matrix effect in quantitative bioanalytical
methods based on HPLC-MS/MS. Anal Chem 2003;75:
3019e30.
152. Wang S, Cyronak M, Yang E. Does a stable isotopically labeled
internal standard always correct analyte response? A matrix
effect study on a LC/MS/MS method for the determination of
carvedilol enantiomers in human plasma. J Pharm Biomed
Anal 2007;43:701e7.

65

153. Krause E, Wenschuh H, Jungblut PR. The dominance of
arginine-containing peptides in MALDI-derived tryptic mass
ﬁngerprints of proteins. Anal Chem 1999;71:4160e5.
154. Gharahdaghi F, Kirchner M, Fernandez J, et al. Peptide-mass
proﬁles of polyvinylidene diﬂuoride-bound proteins by
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometry in the presence of nonionic detergents. Anal
Biochem 1996;233:94e9.

