Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274
DOI 10.1007/s00253-011-3377-1

APPLIED MICROBIAL AND CELL PHYSIOLOGY

Evaluation of cell damage caused by cold sampling
and quenching for metabolome analysis
Friederike Schädel & Florian David &
Ezequiel Franco-Lara

Received: 8 March 2011 / Revised: 9 May 2011 / Accepted: 9 May 2011 / Published online: 21 June 2011
# Springer-Verlag 2011

Abstract Cell damage during sampling and quenching for
metabolome analysis have been investigated at whole
sample level using an OD-based method and ATP loss
investigation, and at single cell level by means of flow
cytometry. Escherichia coli was cultivated in shake flasks
and sampled into several cold quenching solutions during
exponential growth phase varying quenching solution
composition and sampling temperature. For single cell
analysis, the samples were incubated with selective propidium iodide dye and analysed via flow cytometry to
differentiate between intact and damaged cells. It was
found that every combination of quenching solution,
temperature, or cooling rate tested influenced the E. coli
cell membrane integrity indicating rupture which will not
only let the dye in, but also intracellular ATP out of the
cells, which is not desired in in vivo metabolome analysis.
Keywords Cell leakage . Quenching . Flow cytometry .
Propidium iodide . Membrane integrity

Introduction
Cell leakage during cold-shock quenching has been
reported over the last years by numerous research groups
seeking for an ideal solution to stop cell activity of pro- and
eukaryotic cells in metabolome studies (Bolten et al. 2007;
Link et al. 2008; Spura et al. 2009; Villas-Bôas et al. 2007).
This phenomenon has been reported long before the boom
F. Schädel : F. David : E. Franco-Lara (*)
Institute of Biochemical Engineering,
Technische Universität Braunschweig,
Gaußstraße 17,
38106 Braunschweig, Germany
e-mail: e.franco-lara@tu-braunschweig.de

of the “omics”-era as an answer to cold and osmotic stress,
reporting the release of intracellular components like
cations and small non-electrolyte molecules (Haest et al.
1972), phosphorylated glucose analogs (Delobbe et al.
1971), thiomethylgalactosidase, valine and galactose (Leder
1972), amino acids (Wargel et al. 1970), and even whole
membrane proteins (Neu and Heppel 1965; Nossal and
Heppel 1966; Piperno and Oxender 1966). Nevertheless, up
to date, no cold quenching agent or technique has been
found that enables an accurate estimation of intracellular
concentrations of intermediate metabolites with high turnover rates since cell leakage prevents its unambiguous
quantification (Villas-Boas and Bruheim 2007).
Besides the development of reproducible sampling
procedures for quantitative analysis of the low intracellular
metabolite concentrations, the sampling procedure should
ensure that the present rapid changing state of the culture is
correctly reflected in the measurements (Schaedel and
Franco-Lara 2009). Therefore, a sampling procedure for
accurate metabolome analysis is only guaranteed when cell
integrity and minimal cell damage of the sampled microbial
population are also guaranteed. Until now, cell wall and
membrane damage has been assumed as the main reason for
preventing detailed analysis of in vivo metabolite concentration and distribution (Spura et al. 2009; Villas-Bôas et al.
2007; Villas-Boas and Bruheim 2007), since the contact to
any quenching solution might cause the unspecific loss of a
variety of metabolites in an unknown amount (Bolten et al.
2007). However, validation of this presumption through
whole or single cell analysis during or after the quenching
process is actually the exception than the rule for metabolome
studies.
To picture the stresses that microbial cells must withstand during rapid cold and quenching sampling, several
analogies to works on cell membranes applied to cryopres-

1262

ervation or to complement-mediated bacterial killing
(bactericidal chilling), e.g., for food product preservation,
can be named, including (Fay and Farías 1976; Kato and
Bito 1978; Beney and Gervais 2001 and references therein;
Cao-Hoang et al. 2008; Saragusty et al. 2009 and references
therein): (1) increase in the surface to volume ratio through
volumetric changes and membrane shrinkage and stretching
in response to cold hyperosmotic solutions, (2) toxicity
effects of the quenching solution, (3) thermotropic phase
transition of microbial membrane phospholipids in response
to decreasing temperature, (4) freeze-induced dehydration,
(5) osmotic-induced dehydration, (6) loss of cell turgor
pressure, (7) plasmolysis, (8) possible mechanical stresses
induced by extracellular ice formation as well as cell–cell
and cell–sampler walls interactions, (9) ionic and electrical
effects resulting from preferential incorporation of some
ionic species into the ice, (10) the effects of elevated solute
concentration and intracellular ice formation (IIF), which
are cooling-rate dependent, (11) cold-induced lipid peroxidation and loss of superoxide dismutase activity, (12)
recrystallization during sample preparation for analytics,
which is warming-rate dependent, (13) decrease of cell
membrane fluidity and increase of its viscosity due to
mechanical compression and temperature drop, (14) nonspecific membrane lipid extraction through organic solvents
in the quenching solution, (15) influence of hydrodynamic
energy peaks due to the hydromechanical shear stress
through the rapid liquid withdraw generated in the sampling
device channels at high sampling rates.
Still, the numerous stresses at which the microbial
cells are subject, different aqueous quenching solutions,
e.g., buffered methanol (Bolten et al. 2007) or glycerol/
saline (Villas-Boas and Bruheim 2007), have been tested
in the last years comparing metabolome loss during the
quenching and extraction process searching for the ideal
composition which enables the minimal influences on cell
leakage caused by either osmotic or cold shock (Villas-Bôas et
al. 2007). Britten and McClure (1962) determined an osmotic
equilibrium of intra- and extracellular metabolites in growing
Escherichia coli cells. They observed that changes of the
osmolarity of the surrounding media removed all the free
intracellular amino acids out of the cells (Villas-Bôas et
al. 2007). Based on this osmotic principle, the use of a
solution which does not alter the cell physiology should
therefore reduce osmolaric leakage (Villas-Boas and Bruheim
2007).
The use of methanol as the basic component of
quenching solutions has the advantage that very low
temperatures can be applied during the cold sampling and
quenching process to stop the cell metabolism. The choice
of the starting temperature of the quenching solution has to
be made carefully because it adds to the amount of leakage
during the sampling process (Canelas et al. 2008). A

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

downside of aqueous solutions containing organic solvents
is the removal of several intracellular metabolites from
bacterial cells (Villas-Bôas et al. 2007) or even cell lysis.
Nonetheless, the cold methanol method, originally developed for quenching yeast cells (de Koning and van Darn
1992), still represents the only alternative where the
biomass can be separated from the extracellular medium
with good efficiency. Extracting cells without removing the
media first often leads to severe misjudgement of intracellular concentrations due to extracellular metabolite fractions
(Bolten et al. 2007; Canelas et al. 2008). In addition, media
components like salts may also interfere with many
analytical techniques (Canelas et al. 2008).
Investigation of the possible causes for cell leakage due
to sampling and quenching for metabolome analysis can be
accomplished through determination of cell membrane
integrity by means of flow cytometry. As indicated by
Nebe-von-Caron and Badley (1995), the evaluation of
membrane integrity is the most definite proof of cell
viability since this is an indicator that a cell can potentially
generate gradients and is therefore able to carry on
metabolic activity. Cells with damaged or compromised
membranes are considered as dead (Díaz et al. 2010;
Shapiro 2003), since larger membrane defects may deprive
the cell of materials it would normally accumulate, may
expose it to toxins it would normally exclude, and therefore
the cell would not be able to maintain or generate the
electrochemical gradient and hence the membrane potential
(Shapiro 2003; Díaz et al. 2010).
Flow cytometry is a high-throughput quantitative analysis
technology which enables the characterization of cell populations at single cell level. Based on the scattering and/or
fluorescence signals (either through auto-fluorescence or
using fluorescent dyes) generated after single cell illumination
with a laser beam or UV, the individual response intensity is
correlated to structural and/or functional cell parameters. The
ability of common cytometers to analyze a very large number
of particles (around 5,000 cells per second) while simultaneously measuring multiple cellular parameters per cell
enables the classification of cells into populations (Díaz et
al. 2010 and references therein).
To label damaged cells, several non-vital dyes like
propidium bromide, 7-ADD, or propidium iodide (PI) can
be applied. These dyes, known as impermeant, are
incapable to pass intact cell membranes or walls therefore
staining only damaged or dead cells (Shapiro 2003). The
advantage of PI is an unnecessary use of a second dye to
exclude living cells (Zamai et al. 1996). PI intercalates with
DNA and RNA inside the cell, forming a red fluorescent
complex (Jones and Senft 1985). The fluorescence signal
can then be detected to determine the dye distribution
within the cell population (Diaz et al. 2009; Jepras et al.
1995).

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

In the present work, the effect of several quenching
solutions and initial temperatures on cell damage during
sampling and quenching for metabolome analysis was
studied for E. coli by means of flow cytometry. To quantify
the degree of cell damage, a PI-staining detection accounting for cell membrane integrity was used. Still, the
applicability of the PI-staining method itself was studied
too, since several groups have reported PI accumulation in
some intact bacteria or cells at exponential growth phase
(Díaz et al. 2010; Nebe-von-Caron et al. 2000; Shi et al.
2007; Quirós et al. 2009). Because completely ruptured
cells, which also cause metabolite loss, cannot be detected
with flow cytometry, total cell rupture was instead quantified by monitoring the reduction of optical density (OD) of
treated samples (Delobbe et al. 1971; Svarachorn et al.
1991; Tsuchido et al. 1995) referred to that of untreated
cells. A simultaneous analysis of ATP concentrations in
quenching solution supernatant and cell extract was
performed to account for key metabolite leakage. Throughout the manuscript, the concept of “whole sample level”
refers to measurements performed which delivered integral
values of the sample taken, like the estimation of the optical
density (OD). Contrastingly, flow cytometry delivers
differentiated information per events/cells present in the
sample, i.e., splitting the integral information into quantitative single cell characteristics and therefore this kind of
analysis is referred to as “single cell level”.

Material and methods
Strain and culture medium
For this study, E. coli strain MG1655 was used. Cultivation
was done in minimal medium (Hiller et al. 2007) with only
0.255 g/L MgSO4*7H2O. Agar plates for cell viability tests
consisted of 20 g/L agar, 20 g/L yeast extract, 10 g/L
peptone, and 11 g/L glucose monohydrate. Chemicals were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Cultivation
E. coli preculture was inoculated with 200 μL of a
glycerol stock stored at −86°C and grown at 30°C over
night at 120 rpm in 100 mL of culture medium in
500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks with four baffles in an
incubator (Inkubations-Schüttelschrank BS4, Braun,
Melsungen, Germany). For the main culture, the preculture was centrifuged and re-suspended in the minimal
medium so that 1 mL of the solution was sufficient to
inoculate the main culture. Cultures were grown at 37°C
starting with an OD660 of 0.4 under the same conditions
as the preculture.

1263

Quenching
For quenching tests, 4 mL samples from exponential growing
culture were taken with a 10 mL electrical glass pipette
(Hirschmann, Herrenberg, Germany). The samples were put
directly into Falcon tubes containing 16 mL of precooled
quenching solutions. Tests were done in triplicates. The
quenching solutions themselves were cooled down to −40°C
with a cryostat (Lauda, Lauda-Königshofen, Germany).
Lower temperatures of the quenching solution were achieved
by a −86°C freezer. Afterwards, the falcon tubes were placed
in the cryostat at −40°C, and samples were added when the
solution reached the target initial temperature. Falcon tubes
were weighted for exact sample size determination and
centrifuged (5 min, −19°C, 10,000×g, Biofuge stratos,
Heraeus). Samples from quenching solutions supernatant
were stored at −86°C until ATP determination. Additives in
cultivation broth were ectoine and hydroxyectoine. Additives
in 60% MeOH quenching solution included 70 mM HEPES
(Hiller et al. 2007), 40% glycerine/NaCL (5.6% m/v, saline
solution) (Link et al. 2008), glutaraldehyde (GA) (Tsuchido
et al. 1995), trehalose (5% m/v), and mannitol (0.5% m/v). In
addition, 60% glycerine/NaCL (5.6% m/v, saline solution)
(Villas-Boas and Bruheim 2007) was tested.
Monitoring of cell damage
The quenched cell pellet was re-suspended in 4 mL 1%
PBS buffer (with 8 g/L NaCl, 0.2 g/L KCl, 1.44 g/L
Na2HPO4, and 0.24 g/L KH2PO4) and placed on ice. OD660
was determined, and samples were diluted to 0.1 with PBS
buffer. This was done as well to untreated samples from the
main culture for comparison. Cell lysis was monitored by
reduction of OD660 after re-suspension in 4 mL PBS buffer.
As parameter, the OD recovery ratio, φ was used:

8

OD660;Recovered
 100%
OD660;Original

ð1Þ

where OD660,Recovered is the OD660 value of the resuspended sample and OD660,Original the value of the culture
itself. Membrane integrity was determined by incubation
with PI (10 μg/mL) for 4 min and measurement of
fluorescence with a flow cytometer (Cell Lab Quanta™
Flow Cytometer, Beckman Coulter, Brea, USA).
The Sideward Scatter (SS) signal was used as a trigger
signal, and red fluorescence (FL3) was detected through a
670 nm long pass filter. Sample rate never exceeded 1,000
events/s. Signals were logarithmically amplified, and PMT
settings were adjusted to particular PI-staining method.
Untreated cells from cultivation caused a single peak during
FL3 measurement at low fluorescence intensities. These
measurements were taken in all cases as reference.

1264

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

Complete cell rupture/lysis was monitored following the
method reported by Delobbe et al. (1971) and Tsuchido et
al. (1995) employing the OD recovery ratio, φ. The
influence of the main aqueous component methanol on cell
damage was first tested by varying its concentration in the
quenching solution using a starting temperature for sampling of −20°C. Despite its concentration, methanol had, in
essence, a negative effect on the OD recovery ratio of the
re-suspended cell pellet, and none of the solutions permitted
the complete recovery of the culture OD (Fig. 1). The OD
recovery ratio φ ranged from 75% to 85% indicating that
about 15% to 25% of the E. coli cells in the sample
underwent a volume loss and/or lysis process with basically
direct metabolite loss into the quenching solution. Using

methanol as sole component of a quenching solution
therefore provokes cell rupture not only through the shock
caused by the high osmotic difference suffered by the cells
entering the pure aqueous methanol solution from the
culture medium but also through methanol as cellpermeating substance itself (Villas-Boas and Bruheim
2007).
In a second step, the influence of the starting temperature
of the quenching solution on cell damage was tested for E.
coli taking a broader temperature range than that described
in Canelas et al. (2008) for yeast. In this case, 100%
methanol with a starting temperature below −40°C and a
maximum mixing temperature below −20°C was identified
as optimal conditions for yeast quenching using a quenching solution-sample volume ratio of 1:5.
In the presented study, temperatures between 0°C and −76°C
with a sample quenching solution ratio of 1:5 (Canelas et al.
2008) were used. Results showed that with higher temperatures, the OD recovery ratio declined more and more sinking
below 60% at 0°C. The highest OD recovery ratio value of
about 88% was reached with samples taken with the sharpest
temperature shift using a starting temperature of −76°C
(Fig. 2). Using −76°C as sampling temperature was also the
only method appropriate to keep the resulting mixture sample/
quenching solution temperature below −20°C using this
method, which has been traditionally considered to be
sufficient to stop the metabolism (Weuster-Botz 1999).
In a third study, the OD recovery ratio test was further
applied to other quenching solutions reported in literature
which made use of several additives to the methanol-based
formulation (Fig. 3).
Mixing 60% methanol with different additives resulted in
about 30% loss for HEPES buffered solution (−50°C) (Hiller
et al. 2007) which was even more than in un-buffered 60%

Fig. 1 OD recovery ratio φ vs. methanol concentration. After the
cells were quenched at −20°C, centrifuged, and re-suspended in PBS
buffer, no culture recovered the original optical density indicating the
existence of volume loss and/or lysis process

Fig. 2 OD recovery ratios dependent on initial sampling temperature
of the quenching solution. Lowering the starting temperature reduced
the fraction of lysed cells during the quenching process noticeably.
Quenching was performed with a 100% MeOH quenching solution to
avoid viscosity problems at low temperatures

Normalization of FL3 data was done via particular single
cell electronic volume measurements to determine the
“fluorescence concentration”. Cells from quenching solution stained with PI led to two separate peaks, where one
was located in the same area as the one from untreated cells
and was therefore associated with living, undamaged cells.
The area of both peaks was determined, and the area ratios
were related to undamaged and damaged cell pool fractions.
ATP in quenching solution supernatant and cell extract
was determined using the ATP determination kits of Biaffin
(supernatant) and Invitrogen (extract). Extraction was
performed using 1 mL of buffered water (30 mM TEA,
pH 7.5) at 95°C for 15 min in water bath (Hiller et al.
2007).

Results
Cell lysis through cold sampling

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

1265

Fig. 3 Effect of quenching solution composition. All solutions containing 60% MeOH led
to equal φ values, except for
MeOH buffered with HEPES.
The saline glycerine solution
could not be separated from the
cells due to high viscosity of the
resulting mixture. Cultivation
with ectoine and hydroxyectoine
as additives and subsequent
quenching in 100% MeOH did
not change φ markedly (starting
temperature of sampling: GA,
trehalose, and mannitol −40°C,
Glycerine −20°C, rest −50°C).
The use of NaCl in the solution’s legends describes the saline solutions used

methanol (20%). The 60% methanol/glycerine (saline)
solution reported by (Link et al. 2008) had nearly the same
effect as 40% methanol (19%) at a sampling temperature of
−50°C. However, the saline solution of Villas-Boas and
Bruheim (2007) caused severe problems during sampling
and sample preparation. In general, bad mixing was reached
due to its extremely high viscosity at −20°C generating a
kind of two-phase fluid with discernible cell broth/quenching
solution boundaries using pipettes. Cell re-suspension for
OD measurements was therefore not possible to perform
adequately, because cells could also not be homogeneously
separated from the quenching solution with the available
equipment, and it would have been necessary to transfer the
quenching solution mixture to several smaller tubes for
better, but time-consuming centrifugation. Given that samples could not be kept on low temperatures throughout the
process, cells quenched in this solution were not further used
for extraction. Trehalose (5% m/v) and mannitol (0.5% m/v),
which have been used traditionally as cryoprotectants
(Rudolph et al. 1986; Tibbett et al. 2002; Sztein et al.
2001) led to 16% and 19% loss, respectively. Glutaraldehyde
(GA), which is a cell wall stabilizing agent and was already
applied by Tsuchido et al. (1995) to stabilize membrane
lipids in Bacillus subtilis cells (Granboulan and Leduc 1967),
was tested in different concentrations as well and led to 19–
21% loss of OD (−40°C).
Certainly, a fraction of these differences is also due to the
quick re-suspension process in 4 mL of PBS buffer rather
than in the loss of the original OD value, i.e., few cells
could also be removed from the quenching supernatant after
centrifugation of the sample to obtain the cell pellet. The
removal of some cells cannot be completely avoided during
the procedure. The PBS buffer itself appeared to have no
effect on untreated cells but did not completely prevent resuspended quenched cells to undergo further lysis. Still, the
decrease on the OD recovery ratio is a good and direct

indicator for the effect of the cold sampling and quenching
process on whole cell damage.
Single cell damage through cold sampling
After cold sampling, quenched cells were re-suspended in
PBS buffer, incubated with PI, and analyzed in a flow
cytometer. The measured fluorescence was automatically
normalized to the single cell electronic volume estimated
via the Coulter-counter principle. Including the analysis of
non-treated not quenched E. coli cells, two distinguishable
peaks were detected, one related to intact and one to
damaged cells emitting fluorescence due to PI labeling. The
technique was validated with heat-treated cells in combination with agar cultivation of the same samples.
Hiller et al. (2007) used SYTO 9 and PI in microtiter
plates to validate the cell viability during the quenching
process. Cells (99.1±0.8%) were detected as viable with an
intact cell wall. Opposite findings at the single cell scale in
this study suggest that cell membrane is disrupted during
the quenching process. Essentially, every single quenching
solution tested resulted in a distinct pool of damaged cells
(Fig. 4). The variation of the methanol concentration at a
starting temperature of −20°C showed that 40% or 60% of
methanol led to around 50% to 60% of PI-labeled cells.
Using 80% or even 100% of methanol led to about 100%
labeling, and therefore to 100% membrane damaged cells.
Culturability of the quenched cells, i.e., the existence of
colony-forming units, was confirmed using agar plates.
Barely any cells were detected in samples quenched with
80% MeOH, none in 100%, and a closed biological film
with 40% and 60% MeOH (data not shown), while
temperature variation did not change the influence of
100% MeOH on PI labeling.
The addition of HEPES (Hiller et al. 2007) as a buffering
agent and GA (Tsuchido et al. 1995) in concentrations of

1266

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

Fig. 4 Relative fraction of
PI-labeled cells using different
methanol concentrations and
supplements in the quenching
solution. Buffered methanol
(70 mM HEPES), 0.0025% and
0.05% GA did not change the
pattern. Trehalose, mannitol,
0.5% GA, and glycerine
increased the amount of not
labeled cells. The minimal
damage was caused by the
glycerine/saline solution

0.0025% and 0.05% did not change the resulting percentage of labeled cells in 60% methanol. The use of a
combination of 60% methanol and glycerine with the same
amount of NaCL (saline solution, Villas-Boas and Bruheim
2007) resulted in an even higher percentage. Patterns were
shifted to unlabeled cells only by using 0.5% GA (33%)
and the cryoprotectants mannitol (41%) as well as trehalose
(24%), and also by the solution based on glycerine.
As for the saline solution of Villas-Boas and Bruheim
(2007), although it was not possible to estimate an accurate
OD recovery ratio for this sample, the isolation and further
dilution in PBS buffer for cytometric analysis was possible.
The supernatant itself was filtered through a 0.2-μm filter
unit and was analyzed for ATP. In relation to single cell
damage, it could be confirmed that the saline solution can
be considered as a gentile quenching solution, since it
resulted in the least percentage of labeled cells.
ATP leakage through cold sampling
To search for a functional relationship between the damage of
cells to the loss of intracellular metabolites, ATP concentration
in supernatant and cell extract was analyzed varying the
starting temperature of the 100% methanol quenching
solution. The ATP concentration in the quenching solution
supernatant and in the cell extract were examined, since it has
been shown in the past that ATP can be used as an appropriate
indicator for metabolite leakage, as it is usually not excreted
from the cell interior under normal cultivation conditions and
only present in low concentrations in the culture media (Link
et al. 2008; Nasution et al. 2006).
Variation in methanol concentration in the quenching
solution at a starting temperature of −20°C led to a high

loss of ATP during the whole quenching process (Fig. 5). In
general, high extraction values were observed in solutions
with high MeOH concentrations.
Contrastingly, lower starting temperatures led to higher
ATP concentration in the cell extract (Fig. 6). That is, less
extracellular ATP was detected in the quenching solution
supernatant with temperatures below −40°C, which can be
a result of diminished whole cell damage. As for the
intracellular ATP extracted from the quenched cells, two
groups were distinguishable with a sampling temperature
of −30°C as threshold value. While in the first group,
fairly constant ATP concentrations around 1,600 μg/gDCW
were measured for cell extracts sampled with temperatures
equal to or below −30°C, lower ATP concentrations of
approx. 1,200 μg/gDCW were detected for sampling
temperatures above −30°C.
Of all additives and cryoprotectants tested in combination with 60% methanol, like HEPES, trehalose, mannitol,
glycerine, or GA, only glycerine led to a higher ATP
concentration in the cell extract (Fig. 7). However, although
the glycerine-based solution led to a quite high ATP
concentration in the supernatant, the high concentration
could be due to slower chilling and, therefore, to subtle cell
treatment after the quenching process.
The compatible solutes ectoine and hydroxyectoine in
the cultivation media did not affect the ATP concentration
in the supernatant of 100% MeOH quenching solution or in
the cell extract noticeably, which probably simply means
that, due to a lack of stress during cultivation, none of the
stress reducing agents was assimilated and in the quenching
process its protecting effects were negligible. An extra
indication should be given to the low ATP concentration
obtained with solutions containing GA 0.05% and 0.5%. It

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

1267

Fig. 5 Methanol quenching
solutions with starting
temperature −20°C. Using lower
methanol concentrations (40%,
60%) led to a high ATP
concentration detected in the
quenching solution. Methanol
(80%) still led to a loss of ATP,
but a high concentration was
detected in the cell extract which
was higher than the one using
100% methanol

is probable that GA interfered with luciferase in the ATP
determination kit fixing the lysine residues which are
essential for enzyme activity (Kumita et al. 2000; Sung
and Kang 1998).
The results of ATP determination for high methanol
concentration and low starting temperature matched the
findings of Canelas et al. (2008) for Saccharomyces
cerevisiae but not those of Wittmann et al. (2004), where
lower methanol concentrations led to a significant decrease
of metabolite loss from the cells. Unfortunately, the ATP
leakage results neither correlated with the corresponding
OD recovery ratios for whole cell damage (e.g., Figs. 1 and

Fig. 6 Dependence of ATP
recovery as function of the
starting temperature in
quenching solutions. Starting
temperatures below −30°C led
to higher ATP concentrations in
the quenched biomass and lower
extracellular ATP concentrations
in the quenching solution
supernatant

5) nor with the flow cytometer analysis for single cell
damage (see Figs. 4 and 5).

Discussions
Leakage due to cold shock or osmotic stress is considered the
major source of experimental inaccuracies for metabolomic
studies in microorganisms due the non-specific intracellular
metabolite loss during sampling using cold quenching solutions. The results presented in this study indicate that the
membrane integrity is indeed negatively influenced by every

1268

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

Fig. 7 Any of the tested
quenching solutions led to ATP
leakage, shown by ATP in the
quenching solution supernatant
after sampling. The addition of
ectoine or hydroxyectoine to the
cultivation media did not
improve the performance of
100% MeOH solutions (see
Fig. 6). Cells could not be
separated from the glycerine
solution, therefore no extraction
took place. Starting
temperatures for quenching
solutions from top to bottom:
−40°C, −40°C, −50°C, −40°C,
−40°C, −40°C, −50°C, −50°C,
−20°C, −50°C, −50°C

one of the quenching solutions reported in literature, independent of their composition, but with different damage levels.
Cell damage and resulting metabolite leakage can occur
mainly due to two different phenomena: total lysis with
resulting cell fragmentation or single cell damage, e.g.,
reflected in the loss of the membrane integrity, with consequent
cell permeabilization. While the OD recovery ratio of the resuspended cells after quenching gives a first quantitative
indication to complete cell damage, flow cytometry enables the
quantification of cell damage at the single cell level based on
the membrane integrity.
In general, methanol concentrations lower than 100% in
the quenching solution led to a less damaged E. coli cell
pool, whereas variation of the temperature did not change
the impact of methanol significantly, both indicated by PI
labeling. Using different supplements as cryoprotectants or
osmolytes also changed the influence of both methanol
concentration and starting temperature on the ATP concentration spectrum. For example, raising the salt concentration
in the quenching solution to lower the osmotic shock in
combination with the use of the cryoprotectant glycerol can
improve the output of ATP in the cell extract but still led to
a high ATP concentration in the quenching solution
supernatant.
The use of different starting temperatures provokes fairly
constant single cell damage during the cold sampling process.
With an almost constant value of approximately 99% PIlabeled single cells, almost no differences between pure
methanol quenched samples were observed. These results
are confirmed for the whole cell damage too. As discussed
before, it was observed that with starting temperatures equal to
or below −30°C, OD recovery ratios lower than 75% were
estimated, while for sampling temperatures above −30°C,
higher OD recovery ratios were obtained with a consequent

diminished contribution of whole cell disruption to ATP
leakage. Matching to these findings, the concentrations of
intracellular ATP estimated from the cell pellet extract were
lower for temperatures equal to or below −30°C and higher
and almost constant for sampling temperatures above −30°C
(see Fig. 5), implying a more adequate sampling procedure
for intracellular metabolome analysis under the late conditions. Since only ATP was investigated as a model
metabolite in the presented study, different results might be
obtained for other intracellular metabolites. Considering
the ATP findings, the OD recovery ratio method and the
flow cytometer analysis might confirm the assumption of
Wittmann et al. (2004), who reported high losses of
intracellular metabolites in methanol-based quenching
solution: metabolite leakage takes place because of whole
cell damage and permeated single cells. Lower methanol
concentration led to only partially labeled samples,
indicating a still intact cell fraction in the biomass pellet,
which has been erroneously reported before as the intact
metabolite pool using the cold sampling method without
consideration of leakage (Lange et al. 2001; Theobald et
al. 1993).
However, the fundamental question still remaining is
why E. coli cells are leaky when using any methanol-based
solutions for rapid cold sampling and quenching? From
several studies, it is clear that at least three different kinds
of events can cause important variations in the membrane
structure and may induce cell damage: thermal stress,
osmotic stress, and the use of organic solvents. At
physiological temperatures and levels of hydration, the
most relevant functional state of the phospholipids bilayer
of biological membranes is in a fluid, lamellar, liquid
crystalline phase (Mille et al. 2002), which act as a
molecular sieve allowing small hydrophilic molecules to

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

enter into the periplasm of the cell. Maintenance of a
specific bulk lipid state would therefore correlate with a
functional pore-like structure required for nutrient transport
(Janoff et al. 1979).
In bacteria, phospholipids can adopt various fluid and
solid phases characterized by different spatial arrangements
(van Meer et al. 2008). It is known that bacterial
phospholipids may suffer from gel (Lb ) to liquid crystalline
(La ) phase transitions undergoing a thermotropic, cooperative and, usually, reversible process in response to
environmental stresses but especially to temperature
changes (Haest et al. 1972; Cronan and Vagelos 1972;
Morrisett et al. 1975; Eze 1993; Beney and Gervais 2001).
The temperature at which the transition occurs is called the
phase transition temperature, and it depends on various
growth and environmental factors. The classical fluid
mosaic model of the membrane (Singer and Nicolson
1972) considers a leaflet (bilayer) of phospholipids with
considerable motional freedom in which the membrane
integral proteins and other molecules float. In this context,
the term membrane fluidity represents the dynamic properties of lipids within the bilayer. In general, during phase
transition, the long range order of the bilayer is preserved.
Above the transition temperature, the phospholipids bilayer
is in the liquid crystalline state (La ) with short range
disorder of the acyl chains, which are melted and mobile.
Below the transition temperature, the phospholipids are in
the gel state (Lb ) with short range order being the acyl
chains rigid and immobile (Eze 1993). For example,
increasing the degree of saturation of the fatty acyl chains
results in a lowering of the transition temperature (Fay and
Farías 1976; Kato and Bito 1978; Jones et al. 1987; Parola
et al. 1990; Morein et al. 1996; Thieringer et al. 1998;
Yamanaka 1999).
It has been shown before that below certain temperature
and depending on the fatty acid composition of the lipid
bilayer, the membrane of E. coli cells become fragile
causing the rupture of the permeability barrier of the cells
(Haest et al. 1972). Thereby, the amount of released
intracellular cations and non-electrolyte molecules increases
with decreasing temperature of the sampling medium. For
example, a phase transition between 18°C and 30°C has
been observed with the ultimate loss of contact between cell
membrane and cell wall after rapid cold shock or
mechanical stress, due to a sudden decrease in the
cytoplasmic volume enclosed by the cell membrane. The
phase transitions exist not only in the cells membranes of E.
coli, but also in the lipids extracted from them as
demonstrated by Morrisett et al. (1975) for cells grown on
media supplemented with elaidic acid. Simple bilayer lipid
mixtures, which have been extensively used as biophysical
approaches emulating cell membranes, have revealed richphase behavior with the coexistence of even two-fluid

1269

phases, e.g., liquid-ordered and -disordered domains, with
different physical properties within a single membrane
plane (Albon and Sturtevant 1978; Feigenson 2006, 2007;
van Meer et al. 2008). In the case of the E. coli membranes,
the observation of multiple phase transitions was suggested
as to be caused by a heterogeneous distribution of the
membrane lipids into multiple domains and its preferential
association with particular proteins within the bilayer and,
therefore, be the reason for the absence of some transitions
in the membranes, but not in the extracted lipids (Morrisett
et al. 1975). In any case, no matter if the chilling commonly
used for deactivation with cold sampling and quenching is
performed slow or rapid: the change in temperature implies
the passage through at least one lipid membrane phase
transition of cells cultivated at physiologic temperatures.
Still, E. coli cells grown at low temperatures are less
sensitive to membrane transitions caused by cold shock by
increasing the levels of unsaturated fatty acids (Kato and Bito
1978; Parola et al. 1990; Yamanaka 1999). These changes in
membrane lipid composition causes lower phase transition
temperatures and thus compensate order and rigidity of
membrane lipids under cold shock. Similar experimental
evidence has also been obtained for the Gram-positive
bacteria B. subtilis (Delobbe et al. 1971; Svarachorn et al.
1991; Tsuchido et al. 1995; Beranová et al. 2008). However,
even when it has been reported that the reorganization of the
membrane components like proteins and phospholipids
induced by temperature and osmotic pressure variation could
prevent cell mortality (Mille et al. 2002), cell adaptation
would be not possible under the extreme and abruptly change
in temperature and osmotic stress occurring during rapid cold
sampling and quenching. For example, since induction of
cold shock proteins in E. coli is preceded by a 4-h lag after
cold shift from 37°C to 10°C (Jones et al. 1987), and the
characteristic times for rapid cold sampling and quenching
are far below this time, the bacteria would not be able during
this process to compensate for the membrane transition from
a fluid state to a non-fluid state by means of changes in the
membrane lipid composition (Morein et al. 1996; Thieringer
et al. 1998; Yamanaka 1999). This fact might consistently
explain why many samples used for metabolome experiments using either Gram-negative or Gram-positive bacteria
that grow rapidly, e.g., at the exponential growth phase, have
leaky membranes. An enhanced resistance has been found in
E. coli and B. subtilis cells that have grown in minimal
medium, which are reported to recover better than cells
grown on rich medium since their lipid membrane order is
smaller due to enlarged cell diameters (Parola et al. 1990;
Beranová et al. 2008). These experimental observations
would imply that E. coli cells sampled from the exponential
growing phase and incubated on rich medium are more
sensitive to a cold shock and, therefore, present more
metabolome leakage than cells sampled either from the

1270

stationary phase or from steady-state cultivations grown on
minimal medium, as confirmed experimentally with membrane fluidity measurements performed by Cao-Hoang et al.
(2008) for E. coli and B. subtilis.
The late hypothesis is reinforced by the work of Janoff et al.
(1979) who found out that the reason of the differences in
sensitivity to membrane transitions caused by cold shock lies
in the lipid order to disorder transition suffered by the outer
membrane, but not by the cytoplasmic membrane of E. coli
cells, which was not dramatically affected by the temperature
of growth. Their experimental evidence suggests that the
cytoplasmic membrane presumably exists in the gel+liquid
crystalline state during cellular growth at 12°C and 20°C, but
in a liquid crystalline state when E. coli cells were grown at
37°C and 43°C, while the outer membrane apparently
existed in a gel+liquid crystalline state at all incubation
temperatures (Janoff et al. 1979). This fact can be the key
event to understand the occurrence of metabolite leakage in
E. coli during rapid cold sampling and quenching, and also
give a hint to its location: while the outer membrane
undergoes only one phase transition for all incubation
temperatures, the cytoplasmic membrane experiences one
phase transition for growth at 12°C and 20°C, but suffers
from two-phase transitions for growth at 37°C and 43°C. The
existence of more phase transitions would not only explain
the lower sensitivity of cells grown at low temperatures, but
also indicate a more extensive damage of the cytoplasmic
membrane than of the outer membrane due to the twofold
phase transition if they are irreversible. Since Gram-positive
bacteria only have a cytoplasmic membrane but no outer
membrane, similar damages due to phase transitions may be
expected; however, in contrast to E. coli studies, extremely
scarce experimental evidence on thermotropic membrane
characterization has been reported for them.
Besides the total temperature change, the cooling rate itself
has been reported to cause extended cell damage in E. coli and
B. subtilis cells too (Svarachorn et al. 1991; Cao-Hoang et al.
2008). For example, studies on the permeability of E. coli
membrane to permease accumulated substrates showed that
the bacterial membrane is exquisitely sensitive to isoosmotic
cold shock and the substrate pools formed may suffer almost
total loss if the cells are rapidly chilled from 25°C to 0°C
during sampling (Leder 1972). As suggested by the authors,
the isoosmotic shock causes crystallization of the liquid-like
lipids within the membrane and therefore a rapid efflux of
permease-accumulated substrates would be facilitated
through the hydrophilic channels created in the phase change
process.
As showed by Cao-Hoang et al. (2008) with E. coli and
B. subtilis cells, sensitivity to rapid cold shock is a function
of the growth phase: exponentially growing cells were more
sensitive to the rapid cold shock than stationary growing
cells. The measurements indicated that exponentially

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

growing cells have a more fluid membrane than stationary
growing cells at the physiological temperature before the cold
shock occurred and concluded that the instantaneous decrease
in membrane fluidity induced by the rapid cold shock of
exponentially growing cells was higher than that of stationary
growing cells. Moreover, they made anisotropy measurements
comparing the effects of low against rapid cooling rates,
clearly demonstrating that bacterial cells growing exponentially experienced a permanent loss of the membrane integrity
(irreversible membrane rigidification) caused only by the
rapid cold shock, but not by slow chilling. As the authors
argue, this loss in membrane integrity would be unfavorable to
the maintenance of homeostasis, giving rise to discontinuities
in the gelled membrane and creating hydrophilic channels
which facilitate the outflow of cell components, i.e., one more
cause of metabolome loss. Additionally, metabolic compound
lost is also a function of solubility which itself is dependent on
the particular temperature. Therefore, cells may lose their
integrity due to transitions to low temperatures of, e.g., −76°C
(Fig. 2), but the loss of metabolites is avoided by reduced
solubilities in methanol as a solvent as for the case of
peptides (Scanu and Edelstein 1971).
Although Cao-Hoang et al. (2008) claim to have carried
out PI measurements and found a far greater PI uptake in
bacterial cells from the exponential growth phase upon the
rapid chilling than during slow chilling, these measurements
unfortunately are not available for comparison with the
actual results achieved in our study. In any case, both studies
point out that the membrane of exponentially growing E. coli
cells was highly permeabilized after a rapid cold treatment
inducing irreversible alteration of the membrane integrity
and that this chilling-induced damage is exclusively due to a
physic effect, which is the rapidity of the temperature
downshift. Still, metabolome leakage during quenching is
intriguing and may be caused not only by cold shock. For
example, using 40% of methanol at −20°C led to a partially
PI-labeled sample. This indicates that cells must still be
intact otherwise PI would go through the cell membrane.
Quantification of ATP in contrast proved a high leakage,
which can only be due to loss of ATP passing through the
cell wall. Methanol (100%), on the other hand, led to an
almost 100%-labeled cell pool. Still, less ATP was detected
in the quenching supernatant. Increasing the temperature
difference of growth conditions and quenching solution, and
therefore the cold shock, even led to a decreasing amount of
detectable ATP in the supernatant and high ATP concentrations in the cell extract but still to an almost completely
PI-labeled cell pool.
In addition to cold shock, osmotic shock has been named
a possible cause for metabolome leakage in different works
and corresponding quenching solutions adapted to undermine detrimental effects. Thus, the addition of salts, to
adapt the ionic strength of the quenching solution, and

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274

cryoprotectants like trehalose or mannitol has been used
traditionally in quenching solutions for rapid sampling to
simultaneously reduce the damage from cold shock (Bolten
et al. 2007; Villas-Boas and Bruheim 2007). As has been
proposed by Nossal and Heppel (1966), the use of salts like
MgCl2 in solutions as medium to avoid osmotic shock
maintains high viability ratios, being hypothesized that the
cells have in this solution a tendency to stick together and
might not mix perfectly on dilution. In the case of E. coli, it
is well known that it suffers a drastic decrease in cell
volume when confronted to increased osmotic pressure.
This volume change can induce a mechanical effect on the
membrane as primary site of injury, deforming it by cell
shrinkage that can lead to final membrane disruption, which
explains cell mortality due to osmotic stress (Mille et al.
2002 and references therein). The increased area-to-volume
ratio of the cytoplasmic membrane leads to irreversible
surface changes, such as membrane vesiculation, which
induces surface depletion and, when subjected to fast
rehydration, cannot even recover their initial internal
volume, and rupture (Mille et al. 2002). Similar to
increased osmotic pressure, it has been demonstrated that
the mechanical effect of hydrostatic pressure causes a closer
packing of the hydrocarbon chains of phospholipids in E.
coli, which is analogous to the alteration caused by cooling
(Casadei et al. 2002). At least for eukaryotic cells, dramatic
changes in area by ca. 50% are also possible when a phase
transition occurs, as for example by cooling, affecting even
the bounded proteins and, therefore, altering protein–
protein contacts and behavior (Feigenson 2006).
Finally, as for the interaction of the hydrophobic core of the
lipid bilayer with alcohols and organic solvents, as those used
in standard quenching solutions, it has been reported that they
mainly influence the fluidity of E. coli cell membranes
destabilizing them due to increased mobility of the acyl
groups, increased permeability to hydrophilic solutes of cells
and liposome membranes, even enabling a transition from a
lamellar to hexagonal state of the inner membrane (Beney
and Gervais 2001 and references therein).
Considering that besides E. coli and B. subtilis, several
other Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria like
Gluconobacter oxydans, Pseudomonas putida, Zymononas
mobilis (Bolten et al. 2007), and Corynebacterium glutamicum (Bolten et al. 2007; Wellerdiek et al. 2009) have also
presented cell leakage of intracellular metabolites, it is
consequently valid to ask if only damage to the cytoplasmic
membrane make these bacteria especially sensitive to cold
shock, but also ask why other microorganisms like the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae presents minimal cell leakage
after cold shock (Mashego et al. 2003, 2007; Canelas et al.
2008, 2009; Spura et al. 2009).
In contrast to E. coli and B. subtilis, no irreversible
rigidification of the membrane, i.e., reversible phase

1271

transition of exponentially growing cells was observed for
S. cerevisiae (Cao-Hoang et al. 2008). The same research
group have especially focused on studying the mortality of
S. cerevisiae cells exposed to a combination of thermal and
osmotic treatments and the leakage of cellular components
through the unstable membrane when lipid phase transition
occurs (Laroche et al. 2001; Simonin et al. 2008; Gervais
and Martinez de Marañon 1995). First evidence to the cause
of minimal leakage may be found in the reversible phase
transition, which indicates a more robust membrane of S.
cerevisiae than those of bacteria. As proposed by CaoHoang et al. (2008), the answer may lie in the composition
of the membrane. E. coli has three main membrane
phospholipids, which occur frequently in prokaryotic and
eukaryotic cells: phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylglycerol (PG), and diphosphatidylglycerol (DPG)
(Cronan and Vagelos 1971; Morein et al. 1996). In contrast,
yeast cells contain sterols, which are particularly involved
in the resistance of the cell to different types of stress.
Sterols, such as cholesterol and ergosterol, decrease the
fluidity of the La phase of membranes and above a certain
concentration even suppress the transition of pure phospholipid bilayers from the La to the Lb phase, conferring on
the membrane a stable fluidity over the transition temperature range (Bottema et al. 1983; Beney and Gervais 2001).
That leakage of solutes across membranes associated with
either pressure or thermotropic phase transitions in membrane lipids containing high portions of cholesterol also
occurs, has been early demonstrated in human (Drobnis et
al. 1993) and bovine (Saragusty et al. 2009) sperm cells, a
phenomenon which reinforces the hypothesis of cell
damage of the membranes exclusively due to physic effects.
Resuming the findings of the membrane characteristic of E.
coli cells: when growing at temperatures around 37°C and
inoculated in complex media and sampled at the exponential growing phase cells are far more sensitive to damage
arising from rapid cold sampling and quenching than cells
cultivated at lower temperatures with minimal media and
sampled from the stationary growth phase, no matter what
kind of quenching solution is used and if the final sample
temperature is around or below 0°C.
In this work, it was demonstrated that the use of
methanol as sole component of an aqueous quenching
solution causes ca. 15% to 25% cell rupture and lysis of E.
coli. Most probable causes for this cell damage, which
could be monitored using the OD recovery ratio as
parameter, are the organic solution as solvent and possible
osmotic shock suffered by cells entering the methanol
quenching solution from the culture medium. Contrastingly
to the negative effect of methanol concentrations, the
starting temperature of the quenching solution plays an
important role in diminishing E. coli cell lysis. In this sense,
the use of the term “cold shock” as possible explanation for

1272

cell damage in intracellular metabolome analysis literature
may be misleading as was discussed elsewhere (Cao-Hoang
et al. 2008). According to the present results, actually a
positive effect is reached, i.e., whole cell damage diminishment was found for decreasing quenching temperatures.
Therefore, it can be concluded that E. coli cells are more
sensitive to lysis through thermal shock with OD recovery
ratios varying from ca. 58% to 88% than to variations in the
composition of the quenching solution, where OD recovery
ratios ranged from 75% to 85%. From the single cell
analysis, the main conclusion of the present study is that
rapid cold sampling and quenching neither with methanol
nor with the recently proposed ethanol-based solution
(Spura et al. 2009) would be well-suited to avoid unspecific
metabolome leakage in Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria, because both methods would inevitably induce
irreversible alteration of the membrane integrity through
chilling, cell fragmentation, and permeabilization damage
of the membranes exclusively due to physic effects, like the
rapidity of the temperature downshift, increase of osmotic
stress, or unspecific solvent extraction. It is clear that due to
its facility for application and broad spread use, the cold
sampling and quenching method is still an alternative for
rapid inactivation of enzymatic cell activity but very
inconvenient and even burdensome when reaching the final
analytical stage: a differential method, like the one
presented by Canelas et al. (2008) and Taymaz-Nikerel et
al. (2009), is unavoidable for reliable metabolome analysis
requiring independent measurements in the cell extract,
supernatant, and culture broth.
Acknowledgments The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial
support of the (German) Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) to this project.

References
Albon N, Sturtevant JM (1978) Nature of the gel to liquid crystal
transition of synthetic phosphatidylcholines. Proc Natl Acad Sct
USA 75(5):2258–2260
Beney L, Gervais P (2001) Influence of the fluidity of the membrane
on the response of microorganisms to environmental stresses.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 57:34–42
Beranová J, Jemiola-Rzeminska M, Elhottová D, Strzalka K,
Konopásek I (2008) Metabolic control of the membrane fluidity
in Bacillus subtilis during cold adaptation. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1778:445–453
Bolten CJ, Kiefer P, Letisse F, Portais J-C, Wittmann C (2007)
Sampling for metabolome analysis of microorganisms. Anal
Chem 79:3843–3849
Bottema CDK, McLean-Bowen CA, Parks LW (1983) Role of
sterol structure in the thermotropic behavior of plasma
membranes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochim Biophys
Acta 734:235–248
Britten RJ, McClure FT (1962) The amino acid pool in Escherichia
coli. Bacteriol Rev 26:292–335

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274
Canelas AB, Ras C, ten Pierick A, van Dam JC, Heijnen JJ, van Gulik
WM (2008) Leakage-free rapid quenching technique for yeast
metabolomics. Metabolomics 4:226–239
Canelas AB, ten Pierick A, Ras C, Seifar RM, van Dam JC, van Gulik
WM, Heijnen JJ (2009) Quantitative evaluation of intracellular
metabolite extraction techniques for yeast metabolomics. Anal
Chem 81(17):7379–7389
Cao-Hoang L, Dumont F, Marechal PA, Le-Thanh M, Gervais P
(2008) Rates of chilling to 0°C: implications for the survival
of microorganisms and relationship with membrane fluidity
modifications. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 77:1379–1387
Casadei MA, Mañas P, Niven G, Needs E, Mackey BM (2002) Role of
membrane fluidity in pressure resistance of Escherichia coli
NCTC 8164. Appl Environ Microbiol 68(12):5965–5972
Cronan JE, Vagelos PR (1971) Metabolism and function of the
membrane phospholipids of Escherichia coli. Biochim Biophys
Acta 265:25–60
de Koning W, van Darn K (1992) A method for the determination
of changes of gtycolytic metabolites in yeast on a subsecond
time scale using extraction at neutral pH. Anal Biochem
204:118–123
Delobbe A, Haguenauer R, Rapoport G (1971) Studies on the
transport of α-methyl-d-glucoside in Bacillus subtilis 168.
Biochimie 53:1015–1021
Díaz M, Herrero M, García LA, Quirós C (2010) Application of flow
cytometry to industrial microbial bioprocesses. Biochem Eng J
48(3):385–407
Drobnis EZ, Crowe LM, Berger T, Anchordoguy TJ, Overstreet JW,
Crowe JH (1993) Cold shock damage is due to lipid phase
transitions in cell membranes: a demonstration using sperm as a
model. J Exp Zool 265:432–437
Eze MO (1993) Membrane phase separations, asymetry and
implications in the origin of life. Internal report IC/93/381.
International Atomic Energy Agency and United Nations
Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization, International
Centre for Theoretical Physics
Fay JP, Farías RN (1976) Chilling cells enhances the bactericidal
action of fatty acids on Escherichia coli. Appl Environ Microbiol
31(2):153–157
Feigenson GW (2006) Phase behavior of lipid mixtures. Nat Chem
Biol 2(11):560–563
Feigenson GW (2007) Phase boundaries and biological membranes.
Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 36:63–77
Granboulan P, Leduc EH (1967) Ultrastructural cytochemistry of
Bacillus subtilis. J Ultrastruct Res 20(1–2):111–126
Haest CWM, de Gier J, van Es GA, Verkleij AJ, van Deenen LLM
(1972) Fragility of the permeability barrier of Escherichia coli.
Biochim Biophys Acta 288:43–53
Hiller J, Franco-Lara E, Weuster-Botz D (2007) Metabolic
profiling of Escherichia coli cultivations: evaluation of
extraction and metabolite analysis procedures. Biotechnol Lett
29:1169–1178
Janoff AS, Haug A, McGroarty EJ (1979) Relationship of growth
temperature and thermotropic lipid phase changes in cytoplasmic
and outer membranes from Escherichia coli K12. Biochim
Biophys Acta 555:56–66
Jepras RI, Carter J, Pearson SC, Paul FE, Wilkinson MJ (1995)
Development of a robust flow cytometric assay for determining
numbers of viable bacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 61:2696–
2701
Jones KH, Senft JA (1985) An improved method to determine cell
viability by simultaneous staining with fluorescein diacetatepropidium iodide. J Histochem Cytochem 33:77–79
Jones PG, VanBogelen RA, Neidhardt FC (1987) Induction of proteins
in response to low temperature in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol
169:2092–2095

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274
Kato K, Bito Y (1978) Relationship between bactericidal action of
complement and fluidity of cellular membranes. Infect Immun 19
(1):12–17
Kumita JR, Jain L, Safroneeva E, Woolley GA (2000) A cystein-free
firefly luciferase retains luminescence activity. Biochem Biophys
Res Comm 267(1):394–397
Lange HC, Eman M, van Zuijlen G, Visser D, van Dam JC, Frank J,
Teixeira de Mattos MJ, Heijnen JJ (2001) Improved rapid
sampling for in vivo kinetics of intracellular metabolites in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnol Bioeng 75(4):406–415
Laroche C, Beney L, Marechal PA, Gervais P (2001) The effect of
osmotic pressure on the membrane fluidity of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae at different physiological temperatures. Appl Microbiol
Biotechnol 56:249–254
Leder IG (1972) Interrelated effects of cold shock and osmotic
pressure on the permeability of the Escherichia coli membrane
to permease accumulated substrates. J Bacteriology 111(1):211–
219
Link H, Anselment B, Weuster-Botz D (2008) Leakage of adenylates
during cold methanol/glycerol quenching of Escherichia coli.
Metabolomics 4:240–247
Mashego M, van Gulik WM, Vinke JL, Heijnen JJ (2003) Critical
evaluation of sampling techniques for residual glucose determination in carbon-limited chemostat culture of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Biotech Bioeng 83(4):395–399.
Mashego MR, Rumbold K, de Mey M, Vandamme E, Soetaert W,
Heijnen JJ (2007) Microbial metabolomics: past, present, and
future methodologies. Biotechnol Lett 29:1–16
Mille Y, Beney L, Gervais P (2002) Viability of Escherichia coli after
combined osmotic and thermal treatment: a plasma membrane
implication. Biochim Biophys Acta 1567:41–48
Morein S, Andersson A-S, Rilfors L, Lindblom G (1996) Wild-type
Escherichia coli cells regulate the membrane lipid composition in
a “window” between gel and non-lamellar structures. J Biol
Chem 271(12):6801–6809
Morrisett JD, Pownall HJ, Plumlee RT, Smith LC, Zehner ZE, Esfahani
M, Wakil SJ (1975) Multiple thermotropic phase transitions in
Escherichia coli membranes and membrane lipids. A comparison
of results obtained by nitroxyl stearate paramagnetic resonance,
pyrene excimer fluorescence, and enzyme activity measurements. J
Biol Chem 250(17):6969–6976
Nasution U, van Gulik WM, Kleijn RJ, van Winden WA, Proell A,
Heijnen JJ (2006) Measurement of intracellular metabolites of
primary metabolism and adenine nucleotides in chemostat cultivated
Penicillium chrysogenum. Biotechnol Bioeng 94:159–166
Nebe-von-Caron G, Badley RA (1995) Viability assessment of bacteria in
mixed populations using flow cytometry. J Microscopy 179:55–66
Nebe-von-Caron G, Stephens PJ, Hewitt CJ, Powell JR, Badley RA
(2000) Analysis of bacterial function by multi-colour fluorescence flow cytometry and single cell sorting. J Microbiol
Methods 42:97–114
Neu HC, Heppel LA (1965) The release of enzymes from Escherichia
coli by osmotic shock and during the formation of spheroplasts. J
Biol Chem 240(9):3685–3692
Nossal NG, Heppel LA (1966) The release of enzymes by osmotic
shock from Escherichia coli in exponential phase. J Biol Chem
241(13):3055–3062
Parola AH, Ibdah M, Gill D, Zaritsky A (1990) Deviation from
homeoviscous adaptation in Escherichia coli membranes. Biophys
J 57:621–626
Piperno JR, Oxender DL (1966) Amino acid-binding protein released
from Eschericia coli by osmotic shock. J Biol Chem 241
(23):5732–5734
Quirós C, Herrero M, García LA, Díaz M (2009) Taking advantage of
the flow cytometry technique for improving malolactic starters
production. Eur Food Res Technol 228:543–552

1273
Rudolph AS, Crowe JH, Crowe LM (1986) Effects of three stabilizing
agents proline, betaine, and trehalose on membrane phospholipids.
Arch Biochem Biophys 15:134–143
Saragusty J, Gacitua H, Rozenboim I, Arav A (2009) Do physical
forces contribute to cryodamage? Biotechnol Bioeng 104
(4):719–728
Scanu AM, Edelstein C (1971) Solubility in aqueous solutions of
ethanol of the small molecular weight peptides of the serum very
low density and high density lipoproteins: relevance to the
recovery problem during delipidation of serum lipoproteins. Anal
Biochem 44(2):576–588
Schaedel F, Franco-Lara E (2009) Rapid sampling devices for
metabolic engineering applications. Applied Microbiology and
Biotechnology 83(2):199–208
Shapiro HM (2003) Practical flow cytometry, 4th edn. Wiley-Liss,
Hoboken
Shi L, Günther S, Hübschmann T, Wick LY, Harms H, Müller S (2007)
Limits of propidium iodide as a cell viability indicator for
environmental bacteria. Cytometry 71:592–598
Simonin H, Beney L, Gervais P (2008) Controlling the membrane
fluidity of yeasts during coupled thermal and osmotic treatments.
Biotechnol Bioeng 100:325–333
Singer SJ, Nicolson GL (1972) The fluid mosaic model of the
structure of cell membranes. Science 175(23):720–731
Spura J, Reimer LC, Wieloch P, Schreiber K, Buchinger S,
Schomburg D (2009) A method for enzyme quenching in
microbial metabolome analysis successfully applied to Grampositive and Gram-negative bacteria and yeast. Anal Biochem
394:192–201
Sung D, Kang H (1998) The N-terminal amino acid sequences of
firefly luciferase are important for the stability of the enzyme.
Photochem Photobiol 68(5):749–753
Svarachorn A, Tsuchido T, Shinmyo A, Takano M (1991) Autolysis of
Bacillus subtilis induced by low temperature. J Ferm Bioeng 71
(4):281–283
Sztein JM, Noble K, Farley JS, Mobraaten LE (2001) Comparison of
permeating and nonpermeating cryoprotectants for mouse sperm
cryopreservation. Cryobiol 42(1):28–39
Taymaz-Nikerel H, de Mey M, Ras C, ten Pierick A, Seifar RM, van
Dam JC, Heijnen JJ, van Gulik WM (2009) Development and
application of a differential method for reliable metabolome
analysis in Escherichia coli. Anal Biochem 386(1):9–19
Theobald U, Mailinger W, Reuss M, Rizzi M (1993) In vivo analysis
of glucose-induced fast changes in yeast adenine nucleotide pool
applying a rapid sampling technique. Anal Biochem 214(1):31–
37
Thieringer HA, Jones PG, Inouye M (1998) Cold shock and
adaptation. Bioessays 20:49–57
Tibbett M, Sanders F, Cairney J (2002) Low-temperature-induced
changes in trehalose, mannitol and arabitol associated with
enhanced tolerance to freezing in ectomycorrhizal basidiomycetes
(Hebeloma spp.). Mycorrhiza 12(5):249–255
Tsuchido T, Nishino T, Kato Y, Takano M (1995) Involvement of
membrane lipids in cold shock-induced autolysis of Bacillus
subtilis cells. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem 59:1636–1640
van Meer G, Voelker DR, Feigenson GW (2008) Membrane lipids:
where they are and how they behave. Mol Cell Biol 9:112–
124
Villas-Boas SG, Bruheim P (2007) Cold glycerol-saline: the promising
quenching solution for accurate intracellular metabolite analysis
of microbial cells. Anal Biochem 370:87–97
Villas-Bôas SG, Nielsen J, Smedsgaard J, Hansen MAE, Roessner-Tunali
U (2007) Metabolome analysis: an introduction. Wiley, Hoboken
Wargel RJ, Shadur CA, Neuhaus FC (1970) Mechanisms of D-cycloserine
action: transport systems for D-alanine, D-cycloserine, L-alanine
and glycin. J Bacteriol 103(3):778–788

1274
Wellerdiek M, Winterhoff D, Reule W, Brandner J, Oldiges M (2009)
Metabolic quenching of Corynebacterium glutamicum: efficiency
of methods and impact of cold shock. Bioprocess Biosys Eng 32
(5):581–592
Weuster-Botz D (1999) Die Rolle der Reaktionstechnik in der
mikrobiellen Verfahrensentwicklung. Forschungszentrums
Jülich/Life Sciences 2. ISBN-10: 3893362452; ISBN-13: 9783893362455; ISSN: 1433-5549

Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2011) 92:1261–1274
Wittmann C, Kromer JO, Kiefer P, Binz T, Heinzle E (2004) Impact of
the cold shock phenomenon on quantification of intracellular
metabolites in bacteria. Anal Biochem 327:135–139
Yamanaka K (1999) Cold shock response in Escherichia coli. J Mol
Microbiol Biotechnol 1(2):193–202
Zamai L, Falcieri E, Marhefka G, Vitale M (1996) Supravital exposure
to propidium iodide identifies apoptotic cells in the absence of
nucleosomal DNA fragmentation. Cytometry 23:303–311

